the project gutenberg ebook of the trail of deception
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: the trail of deception

author: w. c. tuttle

release date: october 8, 2025 [ebook #77016]

language: english

original publication: chicago, il: best publications, inc, 1948

credits: roger frank


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook the trail of deception ***



                        the trail of deception

                            by w. c. tuttle


        jim bailey was reported dead--which gave him a
        clear field for a profitable game!




i


jim bailey was thoroughly disgusted and discouraged, as he sat down on
a park bench. it was nearly dark, and the lights were blinking around
him. jim was only twenty-five years of age, fairly-well dressed, fairly
good-looking; an average young man, trying to buck the world.

for two days he had tried to find a job, but with no success. he had
two dollars in his pocket, owed ten dollars room rent, due right
now--and an assurance from the landlady that unless he produced the
back rent tonight--

jim was a bookkeeper. that is, he tried to keep books, if he could have
found some books to keep.

he tried to tell himself that he would be all right, if it was not for
cliff de haven, that doggone chiseler! cliff was an actor--a hoofer.
that is, he was when there was a job for him. when there wasn’t he
shared jim’s room, but not in any financial sense of the word. he also
ate at jim’s expense. cliff was a hard man to insult. at least, jim
bailey found him so. maybe jim didn’t use the right words.

cliff always had a big deal coming up. last night he had told jim that
he was all set for the biggest deal of his life and that jim would
profit thereby. cliff chummed with a down-at-the-heel private detective
named bob hawley. jim hated hawley. often he ate with cliff, and jim
paid the check. yes, if he could get rid of cliff de haven--but what
was the use?

it was about eight o’clock when jim got off the bench and walked to his
room. he simply could not pay the bill, so there was no use trying to
fool the landlady any longer.

the landlady was not in sight as jim came in. he looked into the
series of pigeon-holes at the desk, took out a letter addressed to
cliff de haven and a folded sheet of paper, on which was printed in
the landlady’s familiar hand:

    dear mr. bailey: unless you can pay me ten dollars
    tonight, i must ask you to vacate early in the morning.

jim bailey crumpled the paper and tossed it into the wastebasket. no
use keeping it. he went up to his room, where he tossed his hat aside
and sat down on the edge of the bed. the built-in wardrobe door was
open, facing him as he sat, and he got up quickly and investigated.
his best suit was missing, his one best shirt, his best pair of shoes.
on the table was a penciled note, which said:

    sorry, old man, but i had to put on a little dog.
    will see you tomorrow. also borrowed your watch,
    as i needed something to make a little flash.

                                        thanks. cliff.

jim threw the letter aside in disgust. it was like cliff to do a thing
like that. suddenly it occurred to him that cliff had neglected to empty
the pockets, in which were several letters, cards and things like that.
he had probably dressed and got out in a hurry, knowing that jim would
soon be back.

jim expected a visit from the landlady, but she did not put in an
appearance, so he went to bed, leaving the door unlocked. cliff would
probably show up before daylight, full of apologies and other things.

                   *       *       *       *       *

but cliff did not show up. jim got up about eight o’clock. he had an
old suit-case, but little to put in it until cliff came back with that
suit and clothes. he went out to get some breakfast and ran into a new
chambermaid at the bottom of the steps. he inquired about the landlady,
and the woman said she was sick.

“will she be here today?” he asked.

“she will not,” replied the woman. “she has some sort of infiction.”

jim went out to the street, grinning. he said half-aloud, “i’ll bet she
bit herself.”

he ate breakfast in a cheap restaurant and bought a paper, mostly for
the want-ads. he glanced at the front page and his own name seemed to
jump up at him. a smash-up between a truck and a street car--gasoline
explosion--several people killed and injured! only two bodies
identified. robert hawley, a private detective. the other was,
according to the police, jim bailey, address unknown. partly-burned
papers in his pocket and a wrist watch positively identified him.
hawley was identified by unburned articles in his possession.

jim bailey leaned against a post and drew a deep breath. his suit! his
watch! he looked vacantly at the traffic along the street. jim bailey
was dead--it said so in the paper. walking in sort of a daze he went
back to his room. address unknown. he sat down on the edge of the bed
and tried to realize what had happened. jim bailey was dead. that was
a good joke.

he started to light a cigaret, then remembered the letter for cliff
de haven. it was there on the table. there was no letterhead on the
envelope, and the postmark was blurred. he opened the letter and
looked it over. cliff would never read it. it said:

    you will find transportation waiting for you at the
    s. p. ticket office. come to pinnacle city and contact
    me at once. office on the main street. bob hawley says
    you can do the job. remember, your name is jim meade.
    don’t talk with anyone, until we can get together on
    this deal, and don’t mention anything that bob has
    told you. wear no fancy clothes--you’re supposed to
    be in meager circumstances.

                                                ed mclean.

jim bailey read it twice and then sat there, an unlighted cigaret
between his lips. this must have been the deal that cliff had
mentioned. he studied the postmark again and now he could see that it
was pinnacle city, arizona. what sort of a deal was this, he wondered?
cliff was supposed to go to pinnacle city, take the name of meade--and
what else?

pinnacle city sounded interesting, like a small town. jim bailey had
always lived in a big city. a sudden thought caused him to squint at
the faded wall-paper of his room. just suppose this ed mclean had
never--of course he had never seen cliff de haven. bob hawley had
told mclean about cliff. why not take a chance? no job, no home, no
ties of any kind. jim bailey grinned slowly.

“wear no fancy clothes,” he quoted aloud. “you’re supposed to be in
meager circumstances. brother, you meant me!”

he took his almost-empty suit-case and left the house. there was no one
in the lobby. he walked to the ticket office, where he asked about the
transportation. after being shunted from desk to desk, he was sent into
an office, where the man said:

“have you anything for identification?”

jim bailey shook his head. “not a thing. oh, yes--this letter.”

it was the one sent to cliff de haven. the man looked at it.

“you look honest, young man,” he said smiling. “here is your ticket, and
here is the ten dollars expense money.”

jim bailey walked out of the office and headed for the depot.

“good-by, jim bailey,” he said to himself. “i feel like a new man.
maybe i’ll just get kicked in the pants, maybe they’ll dump me into
a nice arizona jail. that is in the hands of the gods. there is one
angle, though, in which i can excel--and that is in forgetting that
my name ever was cliff de haven. if i live and prosper, i’ll send
ten dollars to that landlady.”

the town of northport is twenty-five miles north of pinnacle city.
passengers for pinnacle city get off the train at northport, and take
the stage. northport itself is no metropolis, with its one street and
few false-fronted buildings. jim bailey looked it over and decided it
would be a good place to get out of at once. however, the stage would
not leave for an hour, so he sat down in the little stage-depot and
tried to enjoy a smoke.

the nearer he got to pinnacle city the less he thought of this personal
masquerade he was going to attend.

                   *       *       *       *       *

northport was depressing. at least it was until a young lady came from
the depot, carrying a valise, which she placed on a seat. she was
little over five feet tall, with dark, wavy hair, a beautiful olive
complexion, and wonderful eyes. jim bailey decided that there wasn’t
anything wrong with those lips either. jim bailey admired beauty, but
was woefully girl-shy. he had felt that a girl was a luxury far beyond
his pocket-book.

an old timer came into the depot, grizzled, bow-legged, clad in
overalls, flannel shirt and high-heeled boots. he stared at the girl
for a moment and blurted:

“mary deal--or i’m a sizzlin’ sidewinder!”

“you’re not, uncle len,” laughed the girl. “how are you?”

“i’m finer’n frawg-hair, mary. golly, i’m shore glad to see yuh. it’s
been--uh-h-h-h--mary, i plumb forgot.”

“about uncle clint?” asked the girl. the man nodded.

“why didn’t somebody send me a wire?” she asked. “even a letter might
have given me time to get here. i never knew it had happened for over
two weeks after he was buried.”

the stage driver nodded sadly. “yeah, i know,” he said. “ed mclean was
to have let yuh know, mary. he knowed you was at college. he said he
just forgot.”

“well, i suppose it can’t be helped,” she said. “but i did want to be
here, you see. after all he did for me--”

“yeah, i know. it was too bad, mary. is that yore valise? i’ll put it on
the stage.”

the driver looked at jim bailey.

“are you my other passenger?” he asked.

“i believe i am, sir,” replied jim.

“good! my name’s carson. what’s yours?”

“my name is jim meade.”

“fine. mary deal, meet jim meade.”

they both smiled. len carson said, “i like to make my passengers used to
each other. it’s a long ways to pinnacle city.”

[illustration: “mary deal, meet jim meade”]

“can’t i ride on the seat with you, uncle len?” asked mary.

“i’d shore love to have yuh,” replied the driver, “but i can’t. company
passed a rule agin it, mary. four, five weeks ago i had a whisky drummer
on the seat with me. hit a chuck-hole and lost m’ drummer. hung him up
by the seat of the pants on a manzanita snag, ten feet down on the side
of coyote canyon. if he hadn’t been wearin’ awful tough britches, i’d
have lost him. he sued the stage company for ten thousand dollars, but
they settled for a hundred and a new pair of pants. sorry, but i cain’t
take chances, mary. women’s clothes wouldn’t hold up nothin’, snagged on
a manzanita.”

mary laughed and got into the old stage. jim followed her in, and the
stage headed for pinnacle city. len carson was a wild driver, but he
had never wrecked a stage. it was the first time that jim had ever
ridden over a road like that, and it rather frightened him, but mary
only laughed.

“why are you going to pinnacle city?” she asked.

“i don’t know,” replied jim. “my plans are rather vague.”

“i haven’t been there for over eight months,” she said. “i’ve been away
to school.”

“is your home in pinnacle city?” he asked.

“it was,” she replied. “i don’t know what will happen now.”

jim looked at her curiously, and she explained.

“i have no father or mother. clint haverty adopted me several years ago.
he was wonderful to me. he died a few weeks ago, but no one notified me
in time to attend his funeral. i came as soon as i heard about him.”

“that wasn’t a fair deal,” said jim.

“no, it wasn’t.”

“was he a relative?”

mary shook her head. “no, we were not related in any way. uncle clint
knew my mother, and when she died i went to live at the lazy h. but
he’s dead now and i don’t know what will happen.”

“has he any relatives?”

“he has two cousins in pinnacle city, ace and dick haverty. they own the
box four h outfit. uncle clint never liked them.”

“this box four h and the lazy h, and all that is greek to me,” confessed
jim. “i have never been out of a city in my life before. i suppose they
are places where cattle are raised.”

“that’s right, mr. meade. you’ll soon learn. have you ever ridden a
horse?”

“no, i never have. is it difficult?”

“i don’t know,” said the girl smiling. “i’ve worked with horses ever
since i can remember. you will learn--the hard way.”

“everything i have ever learned was the hard way,” jim admitted.




ii


in spite of the dust and the rough road, the ride to pinnacle city
seemed short to jim bailey. pinnacle city was booming with some new
mining strikes. jim left his valise in the stage depot and located ed
mclean’s office.

the lawyer was short, fat and nearly bald. seated behind his desk, he
looked at jim bailey thoughtfully. this young man didn’t exactly look
like ready money.

“well, young man, what can i do for you?” he asked.

“i am jim meade,” replied bailey soberly.

mclean twitched visibly and his pale-blue eyes blinked.

“jim meade?” he asked. “you--uh--ah, yes, jim meade. well, i--”

“i am answering your letter,” explained jim.

“oh!” the lawyer’s relief was explosive. “for a moment, i had an
idea--sit down! i want to look at you. hm-m-m-m. you don’t look very
prosperous, but that is good.”

mclean leaned back in his chair, an expression of satisfaction on his
face. apparently jim bailey met with his approval.

“you’ll do,” he half-whispered. “have you met anybody--talked with
anybody?”

“i met a girl on the stage. mary deal.”

“did she come in this morning?” asked mclean quickly. “i was expecting
her, but i didn’t know when she was coming. did she talk with you?”

“yes, some. i told her my name was meade.”

“hm-m-m! still, that name wouldn’t mean anything to her.”

“you were expecting her?”

“yes--i wrote to her. but forget girls. this deal is a big one, and we
can’t afford to miss out on it, my friend. how are you fixed for funds?”

“i am not.”

“i see. well, go easy. here is fifty dollars. your room will not
cost over a dollar a day. don’t drink, don’t gamble. let me handle
everything. and above all, don’t try to explain anything.”

“isn’t that a rather ridiculous order?” asked jim. “after all, what
could i explain?”

“true. but if anybody asks you questions about where you come from and
what you are doing here--evade them.”

“when do i learn what this deal is all about?” asked jim.

“didn’t hawley tell you anything about it?”

jim shook his head, wondering if hawley should have told him.

“does hawley get a cut out of the deal?” he asked.

“i’ll take care of hawley. as soon as we can get together, i’ll explain
everything. too many people come in here. i’ll get in touch with you
tonight, if i can, and we’ll go into the deal.”

jim got his suit-case at the stage depot and secured a room at the
hotel. he signed the register with the name of jim meade, and gave his
address as san francisco. the lobby was full of roughly-dressed men,
some of them wearing chaps and spurs--and guns. jim bailey didn’t like
that idea. he stopped at the top of the stairs and saw several of them
examine the register.

“i feel like a criminal,” he told himself, “and i haven’t done a
thing--yet.”

the food was good in the little restaurant, but jim spent most of his
time watching the people. in all his life he had never seen as many
hard-looking men, but they seemed good-natured, having a good time.
there were cowboys, cattlemen, miners, prospectors, and a sprinkling
of dapper-looking gamblers. just after dark he met ed mclean on the
street.

“i’ve been looking for you, jim,” the lawyer said. “we can’t talk
tonight, but i typed out some stuff for you to memorize. put this in
your pocket and study it in your room. see you tomorrow.”

jim went back to his room and studied the paper. it read:

    you are jim meade, born twenty-seven years ago in
    denver, colo. your mother was gale haverty, your
    father was henry meade. he was a small merchant,
    and died fifteen years ago. your mother died nine
    years ago. you heard vaguely of relatives in the
    pinnacle country, and came here, hoping to get work.

jim studied the few lines carefully. it still didn’t make sense. he
repeated it over to himself several times, tore the note into small
pieces and sifted them out the window, where they blew away in the
breeze.

“haverty?” queried jim to himself. “that’s the name of the man who died
and left the big ranch--the one mary--” he stopped and thought things
over. “but where does jim meade enter into the deal? maybe jim bailey
is getting in over his head. well, i’ve got to know a lot more about it
than this, before i get excited.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

mary deal sat on the big porch of the lazy h and talked things over
with tellurium woods, the old cook, who had been there for years.
tellurium was as wide as he was high, and he was only five feet, three
inches tall. except for a tuft above each ear, tellurium was as bald
as a billiard-ball.

“you’ll jist have to blame ed mclean for not bein’ told about clint
dyin’,” sighed tellurium. “i reckon he was too busy to do much thinkin’.
ed mclean and the cattlemen’s bank are the executioners of the will,
which ain’t been read yet. i heard it was to be read tomorrow. you’ll
get the lazy h--that’s a cinch. clint wouldn’t give ace and dick haverty
the sleeves out of his vest.”

mary had no comments. a rider came up to the ranch-house and drew up
at the porch. the rider was tall and thin, with a long, rather
humorous-looking face. he took off his sombrero and grinned at them.

“i’m lookin’ for the ramrod of this spread,” he said quietly.

“if i ain’t mistaken, pardner,” replied tellurium, “you’ll find tex
parker down around the corrals.”

“much obliged, mister--and ma’am,” he said soberly, and rode down across
the yard.

“there goes arizona,” said mary.

“huh? i didn’t git it.”

mary laughed. “when i was at school, i thought of arizona a lot,
tellurium--and arizona was always a tall cowpoke on a long-legged
horse, squinting into the sun.”

“yeah, i know what yuh mean. that hombre looks like real folks, and he
packs his gun low and handy. i like his grin.”

the tall cowboy found tex parker at the stable. tex was a raw-boned
cowboy, hard-faced, with little sense of humor. he sized up the stranger
questioningly.

“yo’re tex parker? good! i’m knowed as skeeter. smith is the last
designation. glad to meet yuh.”

skeeter smith dismounted and leaned against the fence. “what can i do
for yuh, smith?” asked the foreman.

“a job,” replied skeeter. “i was up in pinnacle city, kinda askin’
around, and somebody told me that the bank was runnin’ the lazy h; so
i went to see the head-man of the bank, and he said you was startin’
a roundup next week.”

“i see,” said parker. he didn’t like the idea of the bank taking things
over like that. after all, nothing had been settled.

“i’m just a pilgrim,” said skeeter. “kinda moseyin’ around all the time,
lookin’ at things and places. right nice lookin’ spread you’ve got here.
i’ve been rated as a top-hand with cows.”

tex parker smiled. “you pack yore gun awful low for jist a pilgrim,” he
remarked.

“long arms,” said skeeter soberly. “kinda lazy, too. hate to have to
crook m’ elbow too much. how about a job for a while?”

the foreman nodded. “all right, smith. i’ll show yuh a bunk, and you can
dump yore war-bag. start workin’ in the mornin’.”

“right nice and pleasant of yuh, parker. thanks.”

skeeter smith left his war-bag in the bunk-house, got on his horse and
headed back for pinnacle city. tex parker was thoughtful, as he went
back to the stable.

“i’d like to know who that rannahan is,” he remarked to himself.
“pilgrim! oh, well, all i want is a good cow-hand--and he talks like
a good one.”

on the porch tellurium and mary were talking about len carson, the
stage-driver.

“ol’ len’s a character,” laughed the cook. “i think he was exaggeratin’
about the drummer. i don’t believe he ever fell into coyote canyon. i
heard the drummer made a derogatory re-mark about some woman in pinnacle
city, and len knocked him off the seat. didja hear about len gettin’
held up? no?

“yeah, that happened about a month ago. two fellers stuck up the
stage. got away with some gold from the santa isabella mine, and some
registered mail, i heard. had masks on. len wasn’t able to say who
they looked like.”

“len never told me about it,” said mary. “in fact, we didn’t have much
chance to talk.”

“you mentioned a passenger named meade,” said tellurium. “yuh know, i’ve
been thinkin’ about that name, and i kinda remembered clint speakin’ of
somebody named meade. it seems to me that it was some relate of his’n,
but i can’t be sure.”

“i suppose there are a lot of people by that name,” said mary.

“yeah, i reckon there must be. well, i’ve got to start cookin’.”

tellurium bow-legged his way into the house, headed for the kitchen. he
whistled off-key, but with enthusiasm.




iii


jim bailey’s first night as jim meade was fraught with bad dreams and
bed-bugs. stampeding cattle and bucking horses trampled him into the
dust while mary deal hung suspended over the side of a cliff, her skirt
twisted into a manzanita snag. jim wanted to be a hero, and save her,
but his former landlady showed up and chased him through the brush.
however, the bugs were very real.

the bank had notified ace and dick haverty to come in at ten o’clock
that morning to listen to the reading of clint haverty’s will, and they
were in, dressed in their sunday clothes, looking very uncomfortable.
they were a hulking pair of unshaved, unwashed cattlemen, expecting
nothing from the estate of their uncle.

ed mclean, the attorney, was there. no one had invited mary deal. thomas
estabrook, the white-haired banker, was there, grim-visaged, as became a
banker. ed mclean, after a short preamble extolling the virtues of
clinton haverty, opened the sealed envelope. the will was short and to
the point, witnessed by the postmaster and the proprietor of the hotel.

it left the lazy h ranch--buildings, furniture, all live-stock and
money in the bank--to jim meade, son of his sister, gale, and henry
meade, last heard of in denver, colorado. it gave ace and dick haverty
each a silver dollar, but did not even mention mary deal. mace adams,
the grizzled sheriff of pinnacle city, was in at the reading.

“i have never heard of jim meade,” estabrook said. “didn’t clint say
anything to you about him, ed?”

“i asked him about meade, when he signed the will,” replied the lawyer.
“he said, ‘it is up to you to find him.’ i have no idea where to look,
mr. estabrook. of course, we can--”

“wait a minute!” exclaimed the sheriff. “meade? why, there’s a stranger
at the hotel, and i’m sure he signed that name.”

“that,” said mclean, “would be a coincidence.”

“that would be my opinion, too,” said the banker meaningly.

the sheriff found jim bailey at the hotel, sprawled in a chair, reading
an old paper.

“your name is meade--jim meade?”

“why yes,” nodded jim. he saw the insigna of office on the sheriff’s
vest, and swallowed painfully.

“come up to the bank with me,” said the sheriff. “if your name is meade,
we need you.”

jim bailey got slowly to his feet. “the--the bank hasn’t been robbed,
has it?” he asked haltingly.

“not yet,” smiled the sheriff. “this is about a will.”

jim bailey went with him. the presence of ed mclean was reassuring, at
least. the two havertys looked at him indifferently.

“he says his name is jim meade,” announced the sheriff.

“i see,” mused the banker. “your name is jim meade?”

                   *       *       *       *       *

jim bailey nodded. “what is all this about?” he asked.

“do you claim that you are the nephew of clinton haverty?” asked mclean
pompously.

“clinton haverty?” parroted jim. “why, i--i don’t know.”

“you don’t know?” snorted the banker. “what are you doing in pinnacle
city, young man?”

“i happen to be minding my own business,” retorted jim hotly. he didn’t
like the attitude of thomas estabrook, and showed it.

“let me handle this,” suggested the lawyer. “we understand that you
are jim meade. the question is--are you related to the late clinton
haverty?”

“i told you that i don’t know. i have heard that i had some relatives
in this country, but i don’t know their names. i came here, looking for
work.”

“what sort of work?” asked the banker.

“i am a bookkeeper.”

“where and when were you born?” asked mclean.

“in denver,” replied jim. “i am twenty-seven.”

“that checks,” said mclean. “what was your mother’s maiden name--her
first name?”

“gale,” replied jim quietly. the effect was good. “my mother died about
nine years ago.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

it suddenly occurred to jim that it was ridiculous for him not to know
that his mother’s name had been haverty, but no one asked him.

“what was your father’s given name?” the banker asked.

“henry,” replied jim bailey. “he died fifteen years ago.”

the banker sighed and looked at mclean, who was lighting his pipe.

“what is this all about--or am i not supposed to know?” jim demanded.

“young man,” replied the banker, “clinton haverty died a few weeks ago
and the bulk of his holdings have been left to a jim meade, who was
born in denver, twenty-seven years ago. it is very coincidental that
you should come here at this time, but your answers seem definite. of
course, this will cannot be probated for a while, at least until the
judge recovers from an illness. the court will, of course, demand all
possible proof before accepting you as the legal heir to the lazy h.
the reading of this will was held up by me until such a time as mary
deal could be present. i supposed, of course, that she would be
mentioned. however, mr. mclean neglected to tell me that she was not
included.”

“i don’t know what to say,” said jim bailey. “i had no idea of anything
like this. it rather--er--floors me, gentlemen.”

“all we git is a silver dollar apiece, eh?” grunted ace haverty. “that
wasn’t worth ridin’ in for!”

“in these clothes, too!” added dick haverty.

“you didn’t expect he’d leave you anything, did you?” asked the banker
curiously.

“not ’less he had some loose debts hangin’ around,” replied ace. dick
roared with laughter, slapping his leg.

“that’s a good’n!” he gasped. “ace, yo’re a dinger!”

“i believe that is all, gentlemen,” said the lawyer. “nothing more can
be done until the will is offered for probate.”

“how about giving meade a job in the bank?” asked mclean. it would do
away with the problem of expense money.

the banker shook his head.

“there is no opening,” he replied, “and if there was, i’d have to know a
lot about a man--a lot more than we know about mr. meade.”

jim bailey went back to the hotel, feeling that the banker was
suspicious. jim knew now what mclean’s game was and wondered just
what he would have to do for mclean, in case he got the lazy h. but
jim was not without certain fears. if they ever did discover his real
identity, or prove that he was not jim meade--jim bailey didn’t like
to think about it. he was anxious to have a long talk with ed mclean,
but realized mclean had to be careful.

it didn’t take long for the news of the will to become known. the
general opinion was that clint haverty had done entirely wrong in not
including mary deal in the will. as far as the two haverty boys were
concerned, they got too much. tellurium woods, the lazy h cook, and
archie haas, horse wrangler, came to pinnacle city after dark. these
two had stayed away from liquor up to the limit of their ability. they
met with cactus spears, the deputy sheriff, who was a fraternal soul,
dogged by thirst. cactus was small, wiry, with a long nose and
inquiring eyebrows. archibald haas was a long-armed, big-footed
person, whose i.q. was just below zero, but companionable. these three
entered the antelope saloon and spaced themselves closely against the
bar.

they drank soberly and solemnly, bowing to each other before each drink.
sam ballew, the bartender, looked upon them with evident apprehension.
they had started this way before and ended up in a blaze of glory.

“i unnerstand the lazy h is roundin’ up t’morrow,” cactus said.

“thaz true,” replied tellurium. “we’ve gotta count all the li’l dogies.
the bank wants it.”

“wha’ they goin’ do with ’em?” asked archibald, “put ’em in the shafe?”

it wasn’t funny. even the bartender didn’t laugh.

“i shuppose you have heard ’bout mary not bein’ mentioned in clint’s
will,” cactus said.

“heaven’s m’ home!” gasped tellurium. “you mean-- cactus, old friend,
yo’re lyin’ to me. you mean--yuh do?”

                   *       *       *       *       *

patiently cactus told them of the will and its contents. archibald
cried on the bar, but tellurium, built of more solid fiber, cursed the
name of meade. in fact, he went back far beyond the immediate ancestry
of jim meade, and laid the family tree out cold. when he had finished,
or rather, run out of wind, cactus added:

“if that gallinipper thinks he can come here and take things away from
that li’l gal--he’s mishtaken.”

“absholutely and positive,” agreed tellurium. “we’ll run him out of here
sho fasht that it’ll take sheven days of brill’nt shunshine to let his
shadder catch up with him.”

“i vote f’r immediate mashacree,” piped up archibald.

“oh, yo’re jus’ im--im--petuous,” said cactus. “tha’s all--jist an
ingpetuous pershon. ol’ impetuous.”

“i’m archibald,” corrected the horse-wrangler.

“gotta go eashy,” warned tellurium. “might scare him. wait’ll he goes to
bed. then we’ll schneak in on him.”

“tha’s shenshible,” agreed cactus. “then what’ll we do to ’im?”

“don’t rush me,” replied tellurium. “i’ve got wonnerful ideas, but don’
rush me, cactus. let’s have ’nother dram.”

they had several. luckily mace adams, the sheriff, didn’t find his
deputy. he had warned cactus to keep away from strong drink. it
impaired the dignity of the office. it didn’t help cactus’ own
dignity either, because he became more bow-legged than ever. but they
had decided to visit the iniquities of clint haverty on the victim of
his choice.

“’f i didn’ do shomethin’,” declared tellurium, “i could never look that
sweet young lady in the fasch again.”

“i’m with you to the bitter end,” declared cactus.

“bit ’er end?” queried archibald. “esplain it to me, tellurium.”

“have ’nother drink, archibald,” invited cactus. “you’ve got to be drunk
to obscure yore natural stupidity. yore natural reshources are depleted,
don’t-cha know it.”

“i’m jus’ a horsh-wrangler,” sobbed archibald.

“well, jus’ don’t tell the horshes, or you’ll have trouble with ’em.”

“the horshes know me,” said archibald.

“don’t get too familiar with ’em,” advised cactus. “the firs’ thing you
know they’ll be wranglin’ you. have drink?”

“it makes me sick, thinkin’ about mary,” said tellurium.

“don’t worry,” advised cactus. “we’ll do her proud.”

jim bailey was getting ready for bed, when his door banged open and the
three men came in. cactus had a gun in his hand, waving it in wide
circles, while tellurium had a lariat-rope. archibald was too drunk to
more than lend his moral support to the project. jim bailey was clad in
some old pajamas, and it might be recorded that the entrance of these
men frightened him.

“schtop runnin’ ’round like that!” cactus ordered.

“i’m not moving,” assured jim bailey.

“good!” grunted tellurium, shaking out the loop.

“what’s the matter with you?” asked jim. “what have i done?”

“it’s that will,” explained tellurium. “you ain’t gonna git it, i’ll
tell yuh that. this is yore finish, misser meade.”

tellurium suddenly flung the loop. perhaps tellurium’s sense of
direction was no better than cactus’, because the loop missed jim
bailey by three feet and circled the lamp on the table. the next
moment the room was as dark as a dungeon.

for the next twenty seconds or more, there was only the sound of strong
men in mortal combat, the crash of a chair, the upsetting of the table.
then tellurium’s voice rang in triumph.

“i’ve got him! c’mon, grab the rope, and we’ll drag him out.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

willing hands helped him in the dark. they yanked the door open, dragged
their struggling victim the length of the dark hall and down the stairs.
it was a soundless voyage, except for the scuffling feet, the dragging
of the victim. old hank voigt, the hotelkeeper, gazed in open-mouthed
wonder, his glasses balanced on the end of his long nose, as they came
down the stairs.

the three men were almost at the bottom of the stairs, before their
victim, roped around the legs, came bumping down behind them, taking
the brunt of the bumping on that part of him designed by nature for
such things as bumps.

cactus backed over a chair and went sprawling, and the other two ceased
hauling when the victim landed on the floor-level.

“wh-what’s goin’ on here?” blurted old hank. “what’s archibald done?”

tellurium leaned against the desk, panting wearily, blinking. beside
him, hanging onto the rope, was jim bailey, his pajamas flopping. at
the foot of the stairs sat archibald haas, his two legs roped, a
pained expression on his face, together with a fast-swelling eye.
cactus got slowly to his feet. tellurium stared at jim bailey, looked
over at archibald and said:

“didja ever see such hair on a dog?”

“dog?” queried jim bailey blankly.

“you!” snorted tellurium. “what’r you doin’, hangin’ onto that rope,
feller?”

jim bailey swallowed heavily. “you--you said, ‘grab the rope,’ and i--i
grabbed.”

“who hit me?” asked archibald, getting loose and to his very unsteady
feet. “i crave to know who hit me--that’s what i’ve got a cravin’ t’
know.”

cactus sat down in a chair, tears running down his cheeks. tellurium
shrugged helplessly, while jim bailey leaned against the counter and
tried to reason out a few things. hank voigt said:

“young feller, you better go back and hide yore shame. there’s a
two-foot rip in the back of them drawers.”

jim bailey went up the stairs in nothing flat, clutching at his rear.
tellurium looked archibald over critically.

“archibald, if yo’re through foolin’, we’ll go home,” he said.

“i’d love it,” said archibald soberly. “yuh know, when i’m in the city i
jist cain’t re-lax.”

jim bailey went back to his room, righted the table and managed to
light the lamp. the chimney was broken, but the rest of the lamp was
all right. some oil had spilled, and the place smelled of kerosene,
but jim was too upset to care. those men might have killed him.

he could not quite figure out just why he helped them haul archibald
haas down the stairs. perhaps he had been a bit confused. he was about
to blow out the guttering lamp and go to bed, when someone knocked
softly on his door.

it was ed mclean, the lawyer. he glanced at the lamp, sniffed
disgustedly and sat down.

“i came up the back stairs,” he explained. “didn’t want to be seen
coming up here. what happened a while ago? i heard cactus spears trying
to explain it to the sheriff.”

jim bailey told him what his experience had been, and mclean’s comment
was, “drunken fools!”

“not too drunk,” corrected jim nervously. “i don’t like it. what is
this deal, mclean? i am beginning to realize that you want control of
this estate--but what do i get?”

“keep your voice down,” warned the lawyer. “these walls are mighty thin.
you get control of the lazy h. after that, i get financial backing and
buy you out. simple, isn’t it?”

“you buy me out, eh?” said jim quietly. “how much?”

                   *       *       *       *       *

ed mclean looked narrowly at jim. maybe this wasn’t as easy as it had
looked.

“how much do you expect?” he asked.

“all i can get. tonight has proved to me that i am not here for my
health.”

“oh, they were just drunk.”

“you die just as dead when a drunk kills you, mclean. what about this
mary deal?”

“she has no legal claims. she wasn’t even legally adopted.”

“i’m not talking about that. why didn’t this haverty person name her in
the will?”

mclean shrugged his shoulders, and jim continued:

“that banker is suspicious, mclean. the will should have been read two
weeks ago. me being here right on the dot is a coincidence that the
banker doesn’t want to swallow. and another thing i’d like to mention.
if that banker stops to think things over, he’ll realize i should have
known that my mother’s maiden name was haverty. me knowing i had
relatives around here and not knowing the name!”

mclean scowled thoughtfully. “bob hawley said you were dumb,” he
remarked.

“i am, mclean. if i wasn’t i’d leave here tomorrow. just what will i
make out of this deal?”

“ten thousand dollars.”

“i see. from what i can learn, listening around, there must be more
cash than that in the local bank. the ranch and cattle are worth over a
hundred thousand. there was something else. i heard two men talking in
the lobby and one said, ‘the best gold prospect of them all is located
on the lazy h.”

“a prospect doesn’t mean a paying mine,” said mclean.

“taking it all in all, isn’t ten thousand small money for my share of
the deal, mclean?”

“all right,” said the lawyer grimly. “how much do you want?”

“at least half.”

“ridiculous!”

jim bailey shrugged. “fifty percent. without me you are lost.”

finally the lawyer nodded. “all right. i’d like to punch bob hawley
right in the nose.”

“he would probably take it lying down,” said bailey dryly. “you make out
the papers, mclean.”

“papers? you--do you--wait a minute! you mean papers on our agreement?”

“why not?” asked jim. “i’m afraid we don’t trust each other.”

“we better!” snapped the lawyer, getting to his feet. “there will be no
papers.”

“suit yourself. i might claim more than fifty percent. in fact, i might
take over the whole of the estate.”

“listen, my friend,” warned the lawyer, “you play the game my way or
you won’t get anything. i’m not threatening you--i’m merely stating
facts. accidents happen. think it over, and i’ll talk with you later.
doublecrossing won’t pay dividends in this part of the country.”

mclean walked out and closed the door. this time bailey locked it and
went to bed. he pounded the pillow into shape and lay down. he wasn’t
in the habit of talking to himself, but he did say:

“cliff de haven, i don’t wish you any bad luck, but i do wish you had
lived to take over this job.”




iv


clint haverty had told mary one day that she did not need to worry
about her future and he had not even mentioned her in his will. she
had nothing now, but she did not complain. clint haverty had been
more than generous with her, and she was very grateful. the crew of
the lazy h had finished up their first day of the spring count, and
the new man, skeeter smith, had proved himself a good worker with
cattle.

late in the evening, after the men had eaten, skeeter drifted around to
the front porch, smoking a cigaret, and found mary sitting there alone.

“hello,” she said.

skeeter sat down on one of the steps.

“it’s shore nice around here, ma’am,” he said.

“i love it,” she said quietly. “it has been my home for eight years. i
love the sunsets, the sunrise and the moonlight.”

“they’re pretty,” he admitted. “the boys was tellin’ me about the
readin’ of that will, and i’d like to say that i’m sorry.”

“thank you, mr. smith,” she said simply.

“folks don’t call me mister--i’m skeet.”

“they don’t call me ma’am either.”

“i reckon we’re even.”

“is your home in arizona?” she asked.

“home? no, i haven’t any home--mary. wherever i hang my hat. i’m sort of
a pilgrim i reckon.”

“i’ll have to be a pilgrim now, i suppose,” said mary. “i can’t make
this my home much longer. as soon as the will is probated the new owner
will take over the lazy h.”

“yeah, i reckon that’s how they do it. life’s a funny thing. yuh never
know what you’ve got--not for sure. where will yuh go?”

“oh, i suppose i can find a job--maybe.”

“yeah, i reckon so. still, a woman can always marry somebody, and not
have to work.”

“i haven’t given much thought to marriage,” she said.

“i didn’t dare to,” grinned skeeter. “have you ever seen the feller
they’re givin’ the lazy h to?”

“i came in from northport on the stage with him.”

“yeah? what sort of a feller is he, mary?”

“oh, just--well, i’d say he was average--as far as i could see. i didn’t
know he was the heir to the lazy h at that time.”

“city feller, i suppose.”

“oh, yes. he said he had always lived in a city.”

dell howard, one of the cowboys, came around the corner.

“skeet, do yuh want to ride to town with me and dan?” he asked. skeeter
got to his feet.

“i’ll be with yuh, dell,” he replied, and to mary he said:

“keep yore chin up, mary. speakin’ as a drifter, the things yuh worry
most about never happen. a feller died once and willed me his socks,
but i never got ’em.”

“what happened to them?” asked mary.

“oh, nothin’ much. they buried him with ’em on before they read his
will. see yuh later.”

going up the street in pinnacle city that evening, skeeter smith and
dell howard found cactus spears and jim bailey talking in front of
the hotel. dell introduced skeeter to cactus, who in turn introduced
jim to them.

“meade, eh? so yo’re the heir to the lazy h?” dell asked.

“that’s what they say,” replied jim. no one had any comments, nor
anything else, it seemed to jim. dell said:

“i’ll go to the postoffice, before it closes, skeet,” and went on.

“glad to have met yuh, smith,” cactus said. “i’ve got to go to the
office.”

that left jim bailey and skeeter smith together.

“this happens all the time,” jim said. “as soon as they find out who i
am they leave me alone. they resent me.”

“don’t feel too bad about it,” advised the tall cowpoke. “if you can
prove that yo’re entitled to the property, i don’t see what they can
do about it.”

“something happened last night,” said jim soberly.

“yeah, i heard about that at supper tonight. tellurium was tellin’ us
how archibald got his black eye.”

“it wasn’t funny--not to me.”

“you was prejudiced,” grinned skeeter.

“one man threatened me with a gun.”

“yeah, i reckon he did. but that’s nothin’, he didn’t shoot. they resent
you takin’ over the lazy h of course. but if you are entitled to it, why
worry? they’ll make yuh prove it.”

“but suppose the court won’t accept my proof?” asked jim.

“that,” replied skeeter seriously, “would be too bad. folks in this kind
of country believe the court is right.”

“what do you mean?”

“if the court says yo’re a fraud--they’ll hang yuh.”

“they wouldn’t do that!” exclaimed jim.

“my friend,” said skeeter earnestly, “there’s boot-hills made up of
tombstones of men who made that same remark and believed they were
right. this is no country to doublecross the people. i’ll see yuh
later, mister meade.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

jim went back into the hotel and sat down. that was the second warning
he had received on a double-cross. if he double-crossed ed mclean he’d
suffer, and if he double-crossed the people, they’d hang him.

“fifty percent is entirely too little for my job,” he told himself. “i
should get it all--and a bonus.”

still, he mused, fifty percent of a hundred thousand dollars was an
awful lot of money. and then the thought struck him that ed mclean
had been all too quick to agree to a fifty-fifty split. it wasn’t
what a lawyer would do. offer ten percent, and then agree to a fifty
percent. there was something fishy about the whole thing. of course,
he could understand why mclean did not want any written agreements.

jim was very careful to lock his room that night, but no one came to mar
his slumber.

it was after ten the next morning when jim bailey came down from his
room. it was very hot in pinnacle city, and the little hotel lobby was
deserted. jim flung his key on the desk and had turned toward the door
when he heard a sound that was very much like a partly muffled shot.

through the open doorway he could see several men over in front of
the antelope saloon, looking across the street. two of them started
to cross the street, traveling at a fast pace. at that moment hank
voigt, the hotelkeeper, skidded around to the entrance of the hotel,
and fairly fell into the place.

“bank robbery!” he exclaimed. “bank robbery!”

he caught his balance and looked at jim bailey.

“well, do somethin’!” he barked at jim.

“do what?” asked jim, watching more men run from across the street. hank
flopped his arms helplessly.

“shot at me,” he said in amazement. “imagine that, will yuh?”

“i shall try, mr. voigt.”

“well--good! you’ll-- there goes the sheriff!”

jim bailey walked out and went up to the bank, where a goodly crowd had
gathered.

cactus spears was trying to keep them out of the bank.

“thomas estabrook is prob’ly dead,” he reported. “we’ve sent for the
coroner. now, dang yuh, keep out and give us room!”

no one seemed to know any of the details. thomas estabrook was dead,
sprawled behind the counter, a gun on the floor beside him. he had
apparently tried to defend himself. the robber, or robbers, had left via
the rear doorway. no money had been touched, the bandits frightened away
after having shot the banker.

old hank voigt said he didn’t see how many men were in there. he had
gone to make a deposit, and as he came into the doorway he heard a shot
fired. a moment later a bullet blew splinters from a side of the doorway
near his head, and he didn’t stop running until he skidded into his own
hotel.

estabrook was alone in the bank at that time, the bookkeeper having gone
to northport to have a tooth repaired. he was expected to be back later
in the day. the sheriff closed the bank for the day.

jim bailey saw ed mclean at the bank, but did not get a chance to
talk with him. jim went back to the hotel and sat down on the shaded
porch. the town buzzed over the killing of their banker, who was a
much respected citizen. mclean sauntered over to the hotel porch and
sat down with jim.

“well,” he remarked quietly, “there is another coincidence. the one man
we feared has been removed.”

“i hadn’t thought about that,” said jim. “it was a terrible thing.”

“i have some news for you,” said the lawyer. “i had a talk with the
judge a while ago. he won’t be back on the bench for another two weeks.
we discussed the will, and i suggested that you be allowed to live at
the lazy h, at least, until the will has been probated. the judge said
that if i was satisfied that you are the legal heir to the lazy h, it
will be all right for you to take up your residence out there. i said i
was satisfied.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

bailey thought it over for a while.

“meaning,” he remarked, “that i must be out there with mary deal, who--”

“hang it!” snapped the lawyer. “can’t you understand that she wasn’t
even mentioned in the will? she has no more claim than i have!”

“pinnacle city seems to think she has, mclean.”

“hang pinnacle city!”

“with pleasure, mclean--and pinnacle city feels the same way about me.
i have a feeling that the men at the lazy h hate me, and if i am out
there--i have heard that a broken neck is quite a nuisance.”

“they won’t harm you.”

“perhaps not. and you would benefit thereby, not having to pay my hotel
expenses. well, after all, why not?”

“sure,” nodded the lawyer. “if they wanted to hang you they could do it
here as well as at the ranch. i’ll take you out there this afternoon.
pack up your stuff.”

jim bailey grinned. pack up his stuff! he could just about carry it all
in a folded handkerchief. mclean got to his feet, sighed with relief and
promised to be after jim in a little while.

old hank voigt listened to jim’s explanation for leaving the hotel. he
shook his head sadly.

“i’d like to wish you luck, young man,” he said, “but it’ll take more’n
that to help yuh. there’s so many different ways of causin’ a demise
around a ranch. accidental shot, bad broncs, some knot-headed ol’ cow,
which recognizes you as the one who took her calf to market--oh, a lot
of legitimate ways of openin’ your earthly envelope. but, as i say,--or
didn’t i?”

“you said quite a lot, mr. voigt.”

“yeah, i reckon i covered the subject pretty well. well, if i don’t see
yuh again, it’s nice to have knowed yuh, my boy.”

jim bailey winced over the handshake--not the physical hurt, but the
implied fact that he was rushing in where angels fear to tread.

he tried to grin, as he said, “i shall do my best.”

“i’d advise that yuh get some overalls, boots and a gun, and don’t be
too slick-jawed. when yore face starts to itch, that’s time enough to
shave.”

“i have never fired a gun, mr. voigt,” said jim. “why, i might shoot
myself--or somebody else.”

“that’s what they’re made for, my boy--somebody else.”

“i would hate to take that chance.”

“you’d hate to take _that_ chance?” hank voigt looked at him in
amazement. “you--uh--yo’re claimin’ the lazy h, ain’t yuh?”

“yeah, i am.”

“huh! gaggin’ on a fox-tail and tryin’ to swaller a stack of hay!”

“i don’t believe i understand, mr. voigt.”

“you run along and keep claimin’, my boy, and maybe it’ll dawn on yuh
some day.”

“well, thanks, anyway; you’ve been nice to me.”

“you paid and i ain’t cravin’ no cowranch.”




v


ed mclean had his own horse and buggy. they tossed the valise into the
back of the vehicle and headed for the lazy h. jim told the lawyer what
hank voigt had said, but mclean only laughed.

“hank is quite a joker,” he said.

“i _hope_ he was joking, mclean.”

“of course he was. we’re all set now. estabrook might have made trouble
for us, but it is clear sailing from now on.”

“i hope you are right, but something tells me that everything is not
right. these people, as i understand it, do not always depend on the
law to settle their troubles. the court might accept me as the legal
and lawful heir to the lazy h, but some of these cowpokes, as they
are called, might not.”

“forget that part of it. they’re law-abiding people. just because they
carry guns and talk a queer lingo they are not necessarily killers.”

“maybe not. i was thinking about that new man at the lazy h. skeeter
smith, i believe. he intimated that they hang a man for a doublecross
in this country.”

ed mclean shot a side glance at jim bailey.

“o-o-oh!” he exclaimed. “just why did he say that?”

“oh, we were talking about my claims. i intimated that perhaps the court
might not accept my credentials. he said that if the court decided that
i was a fraud the people would probably hang me.”

“bosh!” snorted the lawyer. “my friend, you talk too blasted much! let
others do the talking, you listen.”

“of course,” remarked jim, “my life doesn’t mean anything to you,
mclean. all you are interested in is using me for a cat’s-paw. you want
the lazy h. if this deal works out, very likely you will get it. we are
a fine pair of crooks.”

“and we can’t afford to fall out, remember that, jim.”

“remember that yourself, mclean. i will not be bossed. you may suggest
something, but don’t order. i’ve taken orders all my grown-up life and
i don’t like it.”

“i’ll remember that, jim. sometimes you rub me the wrong way.”

“sorry. i am going to need some overalls and boots. and if you know
where i can get a gun--”

“what in the world would you do with a gun?”

“that,” replied jim soberly, “is something that no man knoweth, until
the experiment has been made. i want to be a man among men.”

“i see,” replied ed mclean. “well, i’d offer good odds that the first
time you pull that gun, you’ll be the only horizontal one among the
men.”

mary deal was the only one to greet jim bailey with a smile. tex parker
turned and walked away, and tellurium backed into the kitchen. there
was an extra room in the ranch-house, which was turned over to jim. ed
mclean talked quite a while with the foreman, and then came up to have
a few words with tellurium, out at the wood-pile.

“listen t’ me, mclean!” tellurium griped. “do you think i’m going to
cook good food for that anteloper?”

“the word is interloper,” corrected mclean.

“the word,” declared the cook, “is no!”

“you need a job, don’t you, tellurium? well, just remember that this
young man is the heir to the lazy h.”

“you don’t need t’ rub it in. as far as a job is concerned i can stretch
m’ apron at any spread west of the mississippi. don’t tell me what i’ve
got to do. you keep up this yappin’, and you won’t be hired to misquote
law to a strange dog in this man’s country.”

“look at it this way,” suggested mclean. “the young man can’t help that
he was clint haverty’s nephew.”

tellurium thought about that.

“all right. in mem’ry of clint haverty, i’ll feed him. but i ain’t goin’
to nurse him along. the boys won’t like it. he won’t be welcome, but if
he can stand it we’ll try.

“that’s fine, tellurium. you’re sensible.”

“you git out of here, before i split yuh with the axe. sensible! huh!”

                   *       *       *       *       *

mclean went back to pinnacle city in a happy frame of mind. at least
the expense problem was settled. he even decided to get jim bailey some
boots and overalls. as far as the gun was concerned, he felt that jim
was a little too new for things like six-shooters.

jim soon found that he was a pariah at the lazy h. he ate with the
cowboys and they snubbed him completely. the food was plentiful and
very good. archibald haas was still sporting a discolored eye, and
he looked daggers at jim bailey, remembering that jim had helped
tellurium and cactus drag him down the hotel stairs. mary ate alone,
and after supper that night, jim went out on the porch, where mary
was sitting.

“did you enjoy your supper?” she asked pleasantly.

“i enjoyed the food,” he replied, “but the company was entirely
anti-me.”

mary nodded sadly. “i’m sorry, jim,” she said. “it isn’t a thing that i
can help. i have talked with the boys, but they all have minds of their
own.”

“i understand,” he said quietly. “they treated me the same way in town.
mary, let me ask you a question. if i left this country, gave up this
inheritance, would you get the lazy h?”

mary shook her head. “no, i am not--was not, i mean--related to clint
haverty. it would go to ace and dick haverty because they are the next
of kin--all his remaining relatives, as far as anyone knows.”

“i have seen them both,” said jim. “i think i’ll stay.”

“i believe you are sensible, jim. your going away would not help me in
the least.”

“mary, tell me something about clint haverty. didn’t he ever tell you
that you might share in the estate?”

“he told me that i would have nothing to worry about.”

“i see. was he all right physically and mentally?”

“the only thing on earth wrong with clint haverty, as far as anyone
knew, was bad eyesight. he didn’t want anyone to know his eyes were
bad; and he wouldn’t wear glasses. i read most of his letters to
him.”

“he died a natural death, i suppose?” jim asked.

“oh, didn’t you hear?” asked mary.

“only that he died, mary.”

“he was thrown from his horse, coming back from pinnacle city, and had
a skull fracture. he usually rode a bad horse, and the doctor says this
one threw him and then kicked him in the head.”

“i didn’t know that,” sighed jim. “i am afraid of horses.”

“you’ll get over that,” laughed mary. “in a few months you’ll be wearing
chaps and riding the hills with the rest of the boys.”

“it sounds very romantic, but i still don’t believe i will.”

skeeter smith finished supper and came around to the porch to enjoy a
cigaret. after the customary greetings, he said to jim:

“if yo’re goin’ to own and operate the lazy h, here’s somethin’ you
ought to know, meade. the lazy h is bein’ robbed. at least, this is
the opinion of tex parker and the boys.”

“tex has said that several times, skeeter,” said mary.

“i know. he says it shows up in the count. tex has gone to town to talk
with the sheriff. this is serious, mary.”

“how does one steal a cow?” asked jim.

skeeter’s brows lifted slightly, and he glanced at mary, who was
smothering a smile.

“the methods,” replied skeeter, “vary.”

“i see,” remarked jim vaguely. “i really didn’t know.”

there was no conversation for a while. then skeeter said:

“how do you like the cattle country, mr. meade?”

“i am afraid of it,” replied jim honestly.

                   *       *       *       *       *

skeeter smiled. “the thing for you to do is to get on a bronc and learn
it first-hand.”

“a bronc is a horse, isn’t it, mr. smith?”

“it is--and call me skeeter.”

“thank you. i have never ridden a horse, but i suppose i must learn.
first i must get some overalls and boots, i suppose. then i can get a
gun and--”

“wait!” skeeter laughed. “have you ever fired a six-shooter?”

“never. but i supposed--”

“you won’t need a gun. the longer yuh can get along without a gun, the
better off you’ll be. take my advice, jim, learn to ride and rope,
brand, judge beef and all that. that six-shooter don’t brand yuh as a
cowpoke--it brands yuh as a man, who, for some reason or another,
expects trouble to cut his trail some day.”

“thank you, skeeter--you have been very kind to me.”

skeeter laughed and got to his feet.

“my friend,” he said, “somewhere in the bible, i believe it says
somethin’ about being cautious about them who come bearin’ gifts.”

“but you haven’t brought me any gifts, skeeter.”

“friendship is a gift.”

“you mean that i should beware friendship?”

“until it has been tried and proved--yeah.”

skeeter went back to the bunk-house. jim said:

“mary, he is a queer sort of cowboy, don’t you think?”

“yes,” replied the girl. “he is different. i believe he would make a
wonderful friend, and i would hate to be his enemy.”

“i don’t believe i have ever had a real friend, mary.”

“few people ever do, jim. uncle clint used to say that a friend was
someone who knew all about you, but liked you in spite of it.”

“in my case,” said jim slowly, “i could hardly expect it.”

“in the morning,” said mary, “i’ll ask archibald to saddle a horse for
you, jim. you might as well learn to ride as soon as you can.”

“you are too kind to me, mary,” he said earnestly.

“say that tomorrow evening and i’ll believe you,” she said dryly....

it was midafternoon next day at the lazy h. archibald haas sat on the
corral fence in the shade of a sycamore and looked at jim bailey,
astride an ancient charger called peter the hermit, so named from his
habit of staying alone as much as possible.

“that there lump on the front end of the saddle,” explained archibald,
“is the horn. it’s used to dally a rope around, not to be hugged. if yuh
cain’t think of anythin’ to do with yore extra hands, let ’em dangle,
they won’t fall off.”

“_i_ might,” suggested jim bailey wearily.

“uh-huh--yuh might. now, the thing t’ do,” suggested archibald, “when
the horse starts lopin’, you try and lope with him. you and pete ort to
git together. and when he trots, brace yore legs. no use of him goin’
one way and you the other. and another thing; that horse is rein-broke.
yuh don’t have to take holt of one rein with both hands and yank his
jaw loose. try it again.”

at supper time jim bailey staggered to the house. peter the hermit
didn’t stagger at all, he lay down where he was. this was almost too
much for his ancient bones. archibald haas said to mary:

“all he needs is the finishin’ touches.”

“what do you mean, archie?” she asked.

“jist shoot him and put him out of his misery.”

“you’ll not shoot peter the hermit!”

“’course not. i didn’t mean him.”




vi


jim bailey was in bad shape next morning. he was barely able to limp to
the breakfast table. the rest of the crew had eaten and gone away, long
before jim bailey came to breakfast. archibald haas was there.

“i’ve got a bronc all saddled for yuh,” he said.

jim bailey groaned.

“this’n is a little faster than pete,” archibald said. “and more
durable.”

tellurium placed jim’s breakfast on the table, stepped back and looked
jim over appraisingly.

“i found a pair of boots for yuh,” he said. “they ain’t no sunday
specimens, but they’ve got heels. you’ve got to have heels.”

“what i need,” groaned jim, “is two new legs, two new arms and a
headache tablet.”

“does it hurt yuh to set down?” asked archibald.

“it does,” replied jim grimly, “but it also hurts me to stand up or lie
down.”

“didja ever try hangin’ by yore hands?” asked tellurium soberly.

archibald stood in the kitchen doorway, yawned widely and announced:

“here comes that knot-headed lawyer from pinnacle.”

jim didn’t want to talk with ed mclean. in fact, he didn’t want to
talk with anybody, but mclean came up to the kitchen. hot weather
gave mclean a beaded complexion and he continually polished his bald
head with a pink handkerchief. jim could see that the lawyer was not
in good humor. he refused breakfast curtly.

jim finished and limped outside with mclean, who led him down by the
corral, where he could talk without being overheard.

“in my mail last evening,” said mclean, a bit grimly, “i got a letter
and a clipping from a friend of mine in frisco. the clipping deals with
the death of bob hawley.”

“bob hawley?” asked jim quickly. “is bob dead?”

ed mclean looked at jim bailey, and his expression was not exactly
friendly.

“according to the time element,” he replied, “bob hawley must have died
the night before you left san francisco. bob hawley told me that your
name was de haven.”

“well,” said jim, “is that remarkable?”

“according to this clipping--yes. the body believed to be that of jim
bailey has been identified as that of cliff de haven, and the police
are looking for jim bailey, who roomed with de haven. they would like
to know why de haven had articles on his person, which identified him
as bailey.”

jim bailey thought the thing over carefully. it would be easy to explain
to the police, as far as he was concerned. he said:

“well?”

[illustration: “you are an impostor!” said the lawyer.]

“you,” said the lawyer accusingly, “are an impostor.”

jim bailey laughed, “so the pot calls the kettle black, eh?”

“you can tell me the truth, bailey,” mclean said. “i don’t want the san
francisco police tracing you to pinnacle city.”

“they won’t get that far,” said jim, and proceeded to tell the lawyer
exactly what happened.

“so de haven merely appropriated your suit, eh?”

“that’s all. i took his letter--and took a chance.”

“all right. i’ll go back now. what makes you so lame?”

“learning to ride a horse,” groaned jim.

“stay off the bad ones,” warned the lawyer. “at least, stay off them,
until this deal is finished. i need a live heir to the lazy h.”

ed mclean drove away, and archibald came down from the kitchen, carrying
a pair of old, high-heel boots. the heels were worn off on the outside,
indicating that the owner had been bow-legged.

“they ain’t much--but they’ll help,” archibald said.

                   *       *       *       *       *

leaning against the corral fence, jim painfully pulled them on. they
were a little tight, but not too bad. walking was difficult, especially
with his aching legs. there was an old pair of overalls and an old
sombrero hanging on a peg in the stable. the overalls were tight but the
sombrero was loose.

archibald looked him over approvingly.

“right now,” he declared, “yo’re three looks and a whoop from bein’ a
tenderfoot. i ain’t sure whether you’d be diagnosed as a broken-down
cowpoke, or a up-and-comin’ sheepherder. however, my friend, you won’t
scare the cows.”

mary came down to the stable. she wanted to be sure that no tricks were
being played on jim. when she saw him she emitted a smothered shriek,
and he laughed heartily.

“how do i look, mary?” he asked.

“how do you feel?” she whispered huskily.

“terrible.”

“you look just that way, jim. are you going to ride again?”

“i am going to try.”

archibald came out with a roman-nosed sorrel, saddled and bridled.
there was little comparison between this horse and peter the hermit,
except that they both had four legs. mary said:

“do you think he’s capable of handling blondy, archie?”

“well,” replied the wrangler, “i figure that blondy is the only horse
around here capable of handling him. he won’t buck. you know blondy. if
he gits four, five miles away from the ranch, he’ll come back in spite
of hell and high-water.”

mary nodded, and watched jim get into the saddle. it was a very painful
procedure, and jim’s face showed it.

“don’t go too far,” she advised. “if you get lost, give blondy his
head, and he’ll come home. and if he wants to come home, don’t try to
stop him; it makes him mad.”

“i shall do my best,” replied jim.

“you let blondy do that, you jist set,” advised archibald.

mary shook her head as jim disappeared down an old road.

“you ain’t worryin’ about that gallinipper, are yuh?” asked the
wrangler.

“not worrying, no,” she replied. “i didn’t think he would have the nerve
to get on a horse today.”

archibald chuckled. “not only that, but he looks almost human in them
clothes, mary.”

“people’s ideas of humanity differ, i’m afraid,” said the girl.

jim bailey soon found out that blondy was not like peter the hermit.
blondy _wanted_ to go places. mary had said that blondy would bring him
home; so why worry? there was a cooling breeze in the hills, which made
riding pleasant. he struck a trail, leading up through a wide swale, and
sent blondy over it in a swinging walk.

for the first time in his life jim bailey felt freedom. he was not going
any certain place, and he was not going home until the horse decided to
go back. all he had to do was enjoy the scenery. the sore muscles were
much easier now, and he began to like riding.

at the top of the swale they found another well-worn trail, and kept
on going. for an hour or more they followed trail after trail, until
jim began to wonder how long before blondy would feel the urge to go
back to the ranch. by this time they were high in the breaks, where
he could see the blue haze of the valley. there were cattle along
the trail, wild-eyed creatures, moving quickly aside into the brush.
two deer broke out of a thicket and went bouncing into the heavy
cover. it was all very new to jim bailey. suddenly blondy stopped
short, shaking his head. jim booted him gently, but the horse
whirled, almost upsetting his rider, struck a down-trail through the
brush, and went along at a swinging walk. jim laughed aloud. blondy
was going home.

it seemed that blondy was taking a short-cut, instead of going around
the way they came. the trail was steep, and the hoofs of the horse cut
deep into the dirt, angling down into a canyon. they struck the bottom
and kept on going down through a mesquite thicket, where the trail was
almost too narrow. those mesquite claws slashed at jim’s overalls and
boots, and now he understood why cowpokes wore leather chaps.

suddenly they broke into an opening, possibly two acres in size. just
ahead, standing against the edge of the brush, were two saddled horses.
near the horses were two men, one of them kneeling down beside a roped
yearling. a few feet away was a tiny pile of sticks, a thin spiral of
almost colorless smoke indicating the branding fire. blondy stopped
short, and one of the horses nickered softly.

                   *       *       *       *       *

both men whirled, the one lurching to his feet. jim started to call a
greeting to them, when a gun flamed and he felt blondy jerk back from
the impact of the bullet. another shot blasted, and jim found himself
pitching into space as the horse fell sideways. only slightly dazed
from the fall, jim got to his feet, dimly realizing that these men
were shooting at him. a bullet tugged at his sleeve, and jim bailey
had a sudden urge to get as far away as possible in the least space
of time.

[illustration: another shot blasted and jim pitched into space.]

it has been said that it is impossible to run fast in high-heel boots,
but jim bailey disproved this theory. it was the first time he had ever
been obliged to run in order to save his life, and he made the best of
it. there was no soreness left in his legs, and he went into that heavy
brush with all the dispatch of a frightened cottontail. not only did he
go into the brush, but he kept right on going, while bullets whistled
past him.

finally he sprawled, exhausted, and waited for the worst. he could
not hear any sounds of pursuit. a half-hour passed, but there were
no sounds, except the buzzing of a bee, the call of a bird. jim got
carefully to his feet. something else buzzed near him, and he
instinctively held still. after a few moments a diamond-back rattler
slowly uncoiled and slid easily away in the undergrowth. jim bailey
shivered. the snake had rattled not over five feet away.

cautiously he made his way back to the cleared space. there was blondy,
flat on his side, but no sign of the two men. he went to the horse, but
the animal was dead. jim’s heart sank. he knew it was a long way back to
the lazy h, but in just what direction?

“it must be downhill,” reasoned the young man, “because we came all the
way uphill. if i ever get out of this alive, i’ve had all i want of the
west.”

it was after sundown that evening, when skeeter smith came riding
along the base of the hills north of the lazy h. he saw a man stumble
out of the mouth of a small canyon. the man stopped in the open,
looking around. when he saw skeeter he ducked down behind some brush.
he was acting so queerly that skeeter approached him cautiously.

it was jim bailey, scratched and torn, his face bleeding, hands cut.
one sleeve of his shirt was entirely gone, the rest of the garment in
tatters. one bare knee protruded from a split overall leg, and there
were cactus spines in that knee.

“meade! what happened to you?” skeeter gasped.

“i’ve been walking,” replied jim wearily.

“yeah, i reckon you’ve been doin’ somethin’. here,” skeeter slipped his
left foot out of the stirrup, “hook your foot into that stirrup and come
up behind me.”

“you mean two on one horse?”

“that’s right. hook that stirrup and i’ll help yuh on. don’t stand there
like a billy-owl--climb up.”

with his help, jim managed to get up behind skeeter. he drew a deep
breath.

“i went riding and somebody shot my horse,” he said.

“they did? well, that’s interestin’. shot yore horse, eh?”

“tried to shoot me, too,” complained jim. “are you sure you know the way
back to the ranch? i think you’re going the wrong way.”

“yore compass is busted, pardner,” chuckled skeeter.

“i feel completely busted,” said jim. “even the snakes buzzed at me.”

the boys were all at the ranch, waiting for supper when the two men
rode in. mary was anxious over the safety of jim. they mopped him off
with water and put his blistered feet to soak, while archibald, with
the aid of pliers, began taking out cactus spines.

jim told them what had happened to him and blondy. no one offered
sympathy. tex parker asked jim if he could find the spot where they
had killed blondy.

“i hope not--ever,” jim said.

tex said, “let’s eat, boys. we’ll have to watch the buzzards to find
blondy and get that saddle back. it sounds to me like somebody was
doin’ some range-brandin’ on other people’s cows. that could be their
only reason for smokin’ up the kid. i wish i’d been in his place.”

“you’d prob’ly stayed in the canyon,” said tellurium. “come and git
it--before i dump it out!”

jim managed to hobble to the table and ate a good meal though he was one
mass of sore spots.

“soon’s yuh git ready for bed,” tellurium said, “i’ll sneak in with
the horse-liniment. that’s a he-man’s cure for everythin’ from ingrown
toenails to dandruff. how do you like bein’ a cowpoke?”

“ask him that in the mornin’,” advised dell howard, “he’s sound asleep.”




vii


skeeter smith went to pinnacle city alone that evening. when he tied
his horse at the saloon hitch-rack, he saw a light in ed mclean’s
office. the lawyer was working on some papers as the tall, lean
cowpoke came in. the fat lawyer shoved the papers aside and leaned
back in his chair, wondering what caused the newcomer at the lazy h
to come into his office. skeeter said “howdy” and sat down.

“what can i do for you, sir?” asked mclean, reaching for his pipe on the
desk-top.

“i thought yuh might like to know that jim meade rode into the hills
today and some rustlers shot the horse from under him. the kid had to
walk home, and he’s pretty sick of his job.”

“job?” queried the lawyer. “he is not working for the lazy h.”

“well,” drawled skeeter, “we’ll call it a deal, instead, eh?”

mclean puffed violently at his empty pipe, his eyes watching the lean
face opposite him.

“deal?” queried mclean quietly.

“yeah--deal.” skeeter leaned forward, lowering his voice.

“i want in on this deal, mclean,” he said.

mclean stared at skeeter, but encountered only a pair of level, gray
eyes. he swallowed painfully and looked at his pipe.

“i don’t understand what you mean,” he protested.

“no?” skeeter smiled slowly. “what would you say if i told yuh that i
know jim meade?”

“i’d say you lied--unless you mean the jim meade at the lazy h. he’s the
only jim meade in this deal.”

skeeter shook his head. “yo’re wrong, my friend. i know the real jim
meade, the only one.”

“that is a lie--and i know it’s a lie!” snapped mclean.

“clint haverty told yuh that jim meade was dead, didn’t he? jim meade
was supposed to have been killed seven years ago in a mine explosion
in colorado.”

“clint haverty said he was!” snapped mclean. “what are you driving at,
smith?”

“clint haverty’s idea of willin’ a ranch to a dead man.”

ed mclean realized that he had fallen into his own trap. he looked
slit-eyed at the tall cowboy and said harshly:

“what’s your price, smith?”

“what does the kid get?” asked skeeter.

“half--i suppose.”

“all right--i’ll take half of your half, mclean.”

“by what right?” snapped mclean hotly. “why, you--”

“think it over,” advised skeeter calmly. “i can ruin yore deal, mclean.
and don’t try any funny stuff.”

“what do you mean, smith?”

“well,” grinned skeeter, “you might shoot yourself and ruin the whole
deal. i’d like to make some big money.”

skeeter got up and walked out, closing the door quietly behind him. ed
mclean went to the doorway. in the lights from the antelope saloon he
saw skeeter smith ride away from the hitch-rack, heading back to the
lazy h. mclean sat down at his desk, his expression very grim.

“i don’t dare tell bailey,” he said to himself. “he’d get so frightened
he’d leave. half of my half, eh? why, the poor fool, who does he think i
am, anyway? if anybody thinks he can stop me from making this deal--let
him try.”

he put on his hat, put out the light, locked the front door and went
out the rear entrance to his small stable. mclean kept a buggy horse
in the stable, but that horse was also a very good saddler.

                   *       *       *       *       *

aching in every joint, and reeking of horse-liniment, jim bailey sat on
the ranch-house porch, his swollen feet encased in a pair of tellurium’s
old slippers. cactus spears, the deputy sheriff, and tellurium, the
cook, sat on the steps, discussing jim’s adventure with the rustlers.
cactus said complainingly:

“if you could only remember what color them horses was. they didn’t
happen to be pink, did they?”

“pink?” queried jim bailey. “they might have been.”

“pink!” snorted tellurium. “why not green?”

“not this time of year,” said cactus. “most of ’em are ripe now. no, i
don’t think you’d find a green one, tellurium.”

“no, it’s a little late, i reckon,” nodded the cook soberly.

“the boys are watchin’ the buzzards today?” asked cactus.

tellurium nodded. “that’s the only way they’ll ever find the saddle and
bridle, cactus. jim ain’t got no idea where he met his waterloo.”

cactus grinned. “you must have went awful fast, jim,” he remarked.

“i have no recollection of speed nor effort,” replied jim seriously.
“one moment i was there by the horse, being shot at, and the next moment
i was yards away from there, hiding under a bush with a snake.”

“yea-a-ah,” drawled tellurium, scratching his chin, “i’ll betcha the
snake took one look at him and said, ‘no use strikin’ at him, ’cause
he’s too blamed fast.’”

after a short pause tellurium said:

“he’s shore hard on the rollin’ stock of this here ranch. poor ol’
peter the hermit is all stove up, and blondy has done gone. i dunno
what _caballo_ we’ll issue to him next.”

“if _caballo_ means horse--banish the thought,” said jim, rubbing the
cramped calf of one leg.

mary came from the main room of the house and joined them.

“we’re wonderin’ what horse to give jim next,” said cactus.

“i think he got off very lucky,” said mary. “two men shooting at him,
getting lost in the hills and all that. it was quite an experience.”

“it shore was,” agreed cactus, getting to his feet. “i’ll have to go
back to town and tell mace adams that jim didn’t stop to look at the
colors of the horses. see yuh later, folks.”

the boys came in from work that evening, but had not found the dead
horse. tellurium wanted to go to town after supper. he asked archibald
to go along, but archibald had a poker date at the bunk-house; so
tellurium asked jim bailey to go along. skeeter smith and tex parker
went in ahead of them. jim had to wear the old slippers, but most of
the pains had left him.

tellurium and jim rode in the ranch buckboard. tellurium had a grocery
order, and left jim to his own devices. in front of the hotel a little
later jim met ed mclean. the lawyer looked disgruntled over something,
and his eyes showed the need of sleep. he looked jim over critically.

“you’re a fine looking heir to the lazy h.”

jim bailey looked back grimly at the fat lawyer.

“you don’t need to be sarcastic, mclean. i darn near got killed
yesterday.”

“yes, i heard about it. you keep out of the hills.”

his tone made jim bailey angry. he flared up.

“don’t try to order me around,” he said. “i’ve told you that before.
i’ve got a mighty good notion to throw the whole deal back at you, and
leave this country.”

“oh, you have, have you? listen to me, bailey.” mclean came in closer,
lowering his voice. “you’re not leaving here.”

“i’m not, eh? who will stop me?”

“i will--and mighty quick!”

jim bailey took aim. never in his life had he hit a man, but now he hit
ed mclean smack on the nose with every ounce of muscle at his command.
it dropped the lawyer squarely on the broad seat of his pants. then, in
a half-hysterical move, bailey reached down, grasped one of mclean’s
ears, yanked his head sideways and yelled into the upturned ear:

“you and who else, mclean?”

                   *       *       *       *       *

if mclean knew, he did not answer.

jim bailey stepped back and looked around. skeeter smith had emerged
from the hotel doorway, and was looking at him, a queer grin on his
face.

“that was a funny thing to do, wasn’t it?” jim asked.

“it looked funny to me,” replied skeeter.

ed mclean got slowly to his feet, one hand clutching at his bleeding
nose. he did not say anything--just went across the street to his
office. several people had seen what happened, and they looked
curiously at jim bailey. tellurium was loading some boxes into the
buckboard in front of the general store.

“i guess tellurium is ready to go back to the ranch,” jim said.

“yeah, he’s loadin’ up,” agreed skeeter, and watched jim bailey walk up
the sidewalk.

“you and who else?” parroted skeeter smith to himself. “i wonder what
mclean said to him?”

jim bailey and tellurium rode back to the ranch.

“what’s itchin’ yuh, kid?” the cook asked. “you ain’t talkin’ none.”

“i knocked a man down on the street,” replied jim.

tellurium said, “whoa!” and slowed the team down to a walk.

“you knocked a man down?” he asked incredulously.

“i struck him right on the nose. you see, i never hit a man before.”

“yuh mean yuh intended to hit him?”

“oh, absolutely.”

“hm-m-m-m! who was he?”

“ed mclean, the lawyer.”

“mclean, the--you ain’t jokin’ with ol’ tellurium, are yuh?”

“no, i’m not joking, tellurium. i knocked him down.”

“well, man, howdy!” exclaimed the cook. “son, yo’re improvin’. yessir,
arizona is makin’ a man out of yuh. well, well!”

“was it terrible?” asked jim quickly.

“in a way--yeah, it shore was.”

“in a way? in what way?” asked jim.

“i didn’t git a chance to see it done. i’d have loved it.”

jim bailey drew a deep breath. “you don’t like mclean?”

“well, i never sent him any love and kisses, son.”

the boys in the bunk-house didn’t believe tellurium until skeeter smith
came back and told them the same story. there was so much speculation
over the reasons for it that the poker game broke up. dell howard said
soberly:

“it kinda sounds like he might have some haverty blood in him, at that.
clint haverty would poke yuh in the nose as quick as he’d look at yuh.
well, it won’t hurt the looks of mclean’s nose, anyway. it might perk
him up a little bit.”

“the funny thing about it,” remarked skeeter, “was the fact that after
he knocked mclean down, he grabbed one of mclean’s ears, yanked his head
sideways and yelled in his ear, ‘you and who else?’”

“maybe,” remarked tex parker, “we’ve underestimated the boy.”

“he’s been after me to git him a six-gun,” said tellurium.

“hold him off,” said dell howard. “we all want to live until after the
ranch changes hands.”




viii


at the request of relatives the body of thomas estabrook was shipped
to philadelphia. the incoming head of the cattlemen’s bank was james
wells, a new man to the country. ed mclean, still suffering from a
sore nose and outraged feelings, lost no time in taking up the matter
of the haverty will with the new banker. wells, naturally, had no
suspicions, and mclean was very persuasive. wells said he was willing
to leave everything to the court and mclean breathed easier.

however, mclean was far from satisfied with the way things were going.
jim bailey had proved belligerent and skeeter smith had thrown a
monkeywrench into mclean’s machinery. between the two of them it would
seem that mclean could expect very little from the lazy h.

there was some small activity around the lazy h that morning. mary was
upstairs, watching through a window, while tellurium and archibald were
safely ensconced in the kitchen. sitting on a corral fence near the
stable were jim bailey and cactus spears. jim was examining an old colt
.41, with a sicklebill handle, and cactus was patiently explaining the
deal.

“it’ll cost yuh twenty dollars, but i’m willin’ to wait for my money,
until yuh--until the court passes judgment on yuh, if yuh live that
long. anyway, i’d get the gun back--i hope.”

“what do you mean--if i live that long, cactus?”

“the way you’ve been handlin’ that hog-leg would indicate a awful sudden
de-mise for you--or somebody.”

“i can learn, can’t i?” asked jim.

“do you know what a moot is?” asked cactus soberly.

“a moot? no, i don’t believe i do, cactus.”

“well, this is a moot question. you’ve got a long ways t’ go, before
you ain’t a menace to yourself. after that, yo’re a menace to everybody
else.”

“i want to learn how to handle a gun,” sighed jim. “i feel it is
necessary, cactus.”

“all right, we’ll try her again. you don’t shoot with both hands. if
that was the right way, they’d put two handles on it. that there thing
is the hammer. that point on the face of it is supposed to puncture the
cap on the shell, not yore left thumbnail, as heretofore demonstrated.

“that doo-jingus under there is the trigger. yuh don’t _yank_ it. now,
let’s get together on it. go ahead and cock it. he-e-ey! don’t point it
at my knee! that’s better. now it’s cocked. grip it in yore right hand.
that’s right. now, yuh place the first finger of yore right hand around
the trigger and--”

_wham!_ part of cactus’ left heel disappeared, the gun bucked out of
jim’s hand and fell behind him and cactus spears swiftly bow-legged
his way toward the house and safety!

“come back here and show me something!” called jim, but cactus merely
flinched and kept on going into the kitchen.

“i hope yo’re satisfied!” barked tellurium. “git away from that
door--it’s thin wood!”

“look at m’ boot-heel!” complained cactus.

“too bad it wasn’t yore head,” said tellurium. “bringin’ a gun out to
that kid! he can’t shoot.”

jim bailey came up and peered through the window at them.

“git away from there, you--you menace!” howled archibald, grabbing at
the curtain.

“i can’t shoot any more--this gun is empty,” called jim.

“good!” breathed cactus. “he shot twice accidently and three times
unconsciously. one thing--he ain’t scared of the gun.”

“i suppose yuh call that a virtue!” snorted tellurium. “i was out there,
cuttin’ wood, and that first bullet hit the axe.”

“i done told him to select a simple target for his first shot,” sighed
cactus.

“yuh mean--he was really shootin’ _at_ tellurium?” gasped archibald.

“that’s enough out of you!” snorted tellurium. “you was scared so bad
yuh ate two yeast-cakes, thinkin’ they was crackers!”

“i thought they tasted kinda fuzzy. they won’t hurt me, will they?”

“keep out of the sun,” advised tellurium. “if they ever get heated up
and start to raise--you better tie yore feet down.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

jim walked around and sat down on the porch, placing the gun beside him.
mary came out, and he smiled at her.

“lesson over, jim?” she asked.

“i ran out of ammunition--and instructors,” he replied. “i am not what
you would call an apt pupil, mary.”

“you will learn,” she said encouragingly.

“i doubt it. i never do anything well. in fact, all i know is how to
keep a set of books and not too well, at that. out here, all that seems
so far away and hazy, like something you dream and try to remember.”

“don’t you love it out here?” she asked.

“love?” jim smiled slowly. “no, i can’t say i do. i don’t fit in,
mary. you see, at first i thought most everybody out here was rather
dumb. when i try to do the things that they do, i know i am the dumb
one.”

“you’ll learn, jim,” she said quietly. “after you have owned the lazy
h for a while, you wouldn’t trade one little dogie for a whole city.
you’ll never want to go back there.”

jim shook his head slowly. “i don’t understand you, mary. you will be
the only one really to suffer, and still you don’t resent me. everybody
else resents me.”

“why should i?” she asked. “it isn’t my ranch.”

“but don’t you resent the fact that--that clint haverty did not leave
you anything?”

“no, jim, it is not resentment. it hurt a little--at first.”

“you’re a mighty sweet girl,” said jim slowly, but he did not look
at her as he said it. “i think you are the sweetest girl i have ever
known. i’ve always been afraid of girls--but i’m not afraid of you.”

there was a chuckle in mary’s voice as she said:

“you’re not trying to make love to me, are you, jim?”

“no,” replied jim, getting to his feet. “i--i couldn’t do that. i guess
i just wanted you to know that i appreciate you. i don’t know anything
about love--except that it should be honest.”

then he walked off the porch and went down to the stable. tellurium came
out cautiously and squinted at his back.

“he didn’t find no more shells, did he, mary?” asked the cook.

“i don’t think so, tellurium; there’s his gun on the porch.”

“he ain’t such a bad feller, mary,” remarked the cook. “i don’t
reckon he’d hurt anybody intentionally, but, man, what he’d do to yuh
accidently! i’d better put that gun away before he finds some more
shells. he’s got more, ’cause cactus gave him almost a full box.”

“i’m sure jim will be careful next time, tellurium.”

“he will, huh? listen, my dear, if he was jist six times more careful
next time, there wouldn’t be enough of us left to go to the polls next
election. what he needs is a pea-shooter with a busted spring.”

archibald found a quart of hard liquor hidden in the oat-box at the
stable that afternoon. some one of the cowpokes had cached it there,
but archibald wasn’t choosey. he took his liquor where he found it.
then he notified tellurium and they went down to the stable and sat
on the oat-box. they didn’t need anything for a chaser. after a few
drinks tellurium said thoughtfully:

“archie, i’ve been doin’ some thinkin’ f’r myself.”

“gettin’ yore brain all wrinkled, huh?” remarked archie, who was not
interested in tellurium’s conclusions. “hit her again, she’s still
a-standin’ up.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

they had another drink.

“yuh know, archie,” tellurium said, “i’ve been cogitatin’ to myself.
why didn’t clint leave somethin’ to mary? don’t answer that--you’ll
only confuse me. he loved her like a daughter, and you know it.”

“what’r yuh tryin’ t’ do--make me cry?”

“i’m tryin’ to make yuh understand, archie. there’s been crooked work
done. what’d clint care about this young gallinipper? why, he never
seen jim meade in his life. archie,” tellurium lowered his voice to a
stage-whisper, “there’s dirty work at the crossroads.”

“which one?” asked archibald.

“yo’re a big help,” sighed tellurium. “what i mean is this; that will
ain’t right. clint haverty never intended it thataway.”

“there’s three, four big swallers left for each of us,” said archibald,
“and we don’t want the owner of that bottle to find us. we’ll hide the
empty in the oats.”

“archibald,” said tellurium severely, “how good are you as a holdup
man?”

archibald stared owl-eyed at tellurium.

“yo’re tryin’ to dig into m’ past, huh?” he grunted. “yo’re a-gettin’ me
drunk, so yuh can put some deadwood on me, huh?”

“archie, yo’re the past-master of the loco lodge!”

“all right--heap me with honors, but yuh can’t slicker me. let sleepin’
dogs lie--that’s my motter. well, who do yuh want to rob?”

tellurium whispered quietly, and archibald nodded dumbly. it was a crazy
scheme, but it appealed to archibald.

“we go to town right after supper,” said tellurium, “and don’t forget to
put a big handkerchief in your pocket, archie.”

“i’ll be there with bells on,” declared archibald.

“you can leave the bells here--this ain’t no shivaree.”

ed mclean was more than a little worried over the way things were going.
that punch in the nose indicated that jim bailey had a mind of his own
and might make trouble. and there was that hard-eyed, cold-jawed skeeter
smith, who knew too much. mclean had no idea of giving skeeter smith any
part of the lazy h. if things came to a bitter showdown, he’d swear that
jim bailey had fooled him; that mclean had accepted him at face value.
bailey had no proof otherwise. bob hawley, the detective, was dead, and
he had mclean’s only contact to secure the right man.

mclean sat at his desk that night, thinking things over. personally,
he felt secure, but he wanted more than personal security--he wanted
ownership of the lazy h. he had schemed long and hard to put over this
deal. he looked at his old safe, half in the shadows from the lamp on
his desk, wondering if there could be any scrap of paper in that safe
that would, or could, incriminate him, in case of an investigation. he
felt sure that everything dangerous had been removed, but as he looked
at the safe, he felt a desire to sift things again and be sure.

he went over to the safe and twisted the dial carefully, swung the
heavy door open and began taking out the papers, placing them on his
desk. a sudden draught caused a paper to flutter off the desk, and a
chill breeze struck the back of his neck.

                   *       *       *       *       *

slowly he turned his head, realizing that someone had opened the rear
door. two masked men were standing there, one of them covering him with
a six-shooter. the man growled behind his mask:

“don’t move! keep yore hands in sight.”

the other man stepped over to the desk, grasped a handful of the papers
and started to put them in his pocket. in fact, he had some of them in
his coat pocket, when a voice behind him said:

“drop the papers!”

his hand came away from his pocket, dragging papers out, and he dropped
them on the pile of papers atop the desk.

“back over by the door,” growled the voice again, and the first two
masked men obeyed. one of them whispered:

“my gosh--another set!”

he was right, there were two more masked men behind them. mclean,
white-faced, watched one of the second pair sweep up the papers and
dump them into a sack.

“is the safe empty?” asked the holdup man.

“yes,” whispered mclean huskily.

swiftly the two men backed away, and went outside. the first two were
watching mclean narrowly. they too backed out, leaving the frightened
attorney still on his knees beside the safe.

slowly he got to his feet, walked to the rear door and looked out into
the night. there was nobody in sight. he locked the door and went back
to his desk, where he sat down heavily, staring at his empty safe. every
paper was gone. suddenly he said aloud:

“what am i worried about, anyway? there was not an incriminating paper
in the safe. this is a job for the sheriff.”

he put on his hat, locked the door and went down to the sheriff’s
office. cactus spears was there, but mclean didn’t want to talk with
the deputy. he found the sheriff at the antelope saloon, ensconced in
a draw-poker game. also in the game was skeeter smith. mclean waited
until the sheriff dropped out of a pot. “mace, can i have a word with
you?” he asked.

the sheriff followed him outside, where mclean told him what happened in
the office.

“two different sets?” the sheriff said. “ed, that sounds like you must
have dreamed it. why on earth would those four men want your papers?”

the lawyer shook his head. “sheriff, i wish i knew,” he said.

“couldn’t you identify any of the four?”

“no, i couldn’t, damn ’em! things like that confuse you.”

“well, i don’t know of anythin’ we can do about it, ed. they’re
gone--and so are yore papers. maybe they’ll send ’em back to you.”

“i suppose i’ll have to wait and see,” sighed mclean.

tellurium woods and archibald haas rode slowly on their way back to the
lazy h. not much had been said since they entered ed mclean’s office.
finally tellurium spoke.

“archie, did you get a good look at them two?”

“yeah. yeah, i seen ’em good.”

“good enough to identify ’em?”

“nope--good enough to stand where they told me to.”

“yuh know,” remarked tellurium, “it’s awful funny that two other men
should get an idea jist like mine. it shows i’m smart.”

“yeah,” agreed archibald, “yo’re smart, tellurium--but them two was the
smartest.”

“how do yuh figure that?”

“they brought a sack.”




ix


the news of the robbery at mclean’s office was brought back to the ranch
by skeeter smith, and jim bailey heard it next morning at breakfast. he
realized that if there had been anything incriminating in that safe, it
was too late to do anything about it now. and, strangely enough, jim
bailey didn’t care. he had lost all desire to help mclean. naturally, he
wanted mary to get some of the lazy h, but that was something beyond his
control. as far as his share of the deal was concerned, he never did
feel that he would ever receive it. he didn’t trust mclean at all, and
the longer it went, the less his trust.

ed mclean came out to the lazy h that afternoon. he said he was out to
get a breath of fresh air, but he soon got jim alone.

“i heard about your robbery,” said jim. “did they get anything?”

“they took every paper out of my safe,” replied mclean, “but little
good it will do them--i saw to that. day after tomorrow that will is
to be probated. i’ve talked with the judge. all you have to do is
appear in court with me and answer questions. if anybody in pinnacle
city thinks that they can stop me from getting control of this ranch,
they’re badly mistaken.”

“i can,” declared jim bailey soberly.

“you?” gasped the lawyer. “don’t be a fool, bailey.”

jim bailey laughed shortly. “i’m through with it, mclean--and you better
be, too.”

“yellow, eh?” sneered the lawyer.

jim shrugged. “i’ll take it on one consideration, mclean.”

“what’s that?”

“that as soon as i get the ownership of the lazy h, i turn it over to
mary deal.”

“well, what a fool you’ve turned out to be! do you think for a minute
that i’d--so you’re stuck on the girl, eh? well, if--”

“turn it over to her,” said jim doggedly, “and we’ll both pull out. you
say i am yellow. i suppose that means, i’m afraid. i am. i believe that
robbery last night was done because four men do not believe that will
was on the square. my acceptance by the court won’t change their minds.
you know as well as i do that the will was not on the square, mclean.
clint haverty did not cut mary deal out of her share--and you know it.”

mclean’s eyes slitted, as he looked at jim haverty. if looks could kill,
jim bailey would have died in his tracks.

“what else do you know that’s funny?” asked the lawyer tensely.

“i know that when you go into court to probate that will, jim bailey
won’t be there. when i came here, i fell for your crooked deal, because
i didn’t know these folks. it looked like a chance for easy money. but
i don’t want that easy money now.”

ed mclean stared grimly into space. his plans were shattered if this
foolish kid persisted in not doing his part.

“you’re letting a pretty face keep you from a fortune,” he said.

“we will leave the woman out of it, mclean. i’m walking out. even if the
haverty brothers get the lazy h--i can’t help it.”

“so that is your final word, eh, bailey?”

“that is final, mclean.”

“all right, you’re the loser,” said the lawyer and started over to get
into the buggy. “i’ll see you in court,” he said, and drove away.

“he’ll see me in court?” queried jim to himself. “what has he got under
his hat, i wonder?”

he walked up to the house and met archibald haas.

“how about some pistol practice, jim?”

jim smiled. “are you willing to take chances?”

“shore--if yuh want to try it. a feller never knows when he’ll need a
gun. it’s good to be able to shoot.”

“yes, i believe you are right, archibald; i’ll get the gun. one never
does know when a gun might be useful.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

archibald led the way far down a dry-wash, where even the worst shot
in arizona would not endanger lives. after an hour of instructions,
archibald threw the undamaged tin can into the brush. “ten feet, or
a hundred, yuh miss ’em all plenty far,” he said.

“that last shot would have killed a man,” said jim.

“yeah, i know--but i ducked. you ain’t cut out for no gunman, jim. you
shut yore eyes, grit yore teeth, and git stiff enough to skate on. then
the gun jumps out of yore hand and i spend my val’able time, diggin’ the
sand out of it. didja ever try a shotgun?”

“would i do better with one?”

“well, yuh couldn’t do any worse.”

jim flopped disgustedly on the porch, and tossed the gun aside.
tellurium came out, wiping his hands on his apron, grinning a little.

“mucho boom--no hit, eh?” he remarked.

“that’s right. i simply cannot shoot a six-shooter, tellurium.”

“well, it’s a good thing to find out. mary went to town a while ago.
she wondered if you’d like to go along, but you was too busy throwin’
lead and i wouldn’t go and get yuh--too dangerous.”

“i’d have been honored to go with her,” said jim. “sorry. when will she
be back?”

“i dunno. she said she might go down and visit with mrs. voigt for a
while; mebbe stay for supper--she didn’t know. was mclean around,
checkin’ up to find out who robbed him last night?”

“no, i don’t believe he was,” laughed jim. “he said they did not get
anything of value from his safe.”

“i jist wondered,” said tellurium, and went into the house.

jim sat there and thought it over. he knew that tellurium and archibald
had gone to town last night. could those two old timers have been one of
the two pairs of masked men? it would be like them to do a thing like
that, trying to help mary deal. but who were the other two, he wondered?

mary deal did not come home for supper, but no one was concerned.
tellurium sat up until midnight, waiting for her, but she did not come.
jim heard tellurium moving about the main room and came out to see what
was wrong. the old alarm clock on jim’s dresser showed the time to be
almost half-past twelve. tellurium was standing at a window, peering
out into the night.

“what is wrong?” asked jim. the cook turned away from the window and
looked at jim.

“mary ain’t home yet,” he said, a worried note in his voice. “she
wouldn’t stay this late--alone--not unless she said she’d stay there
all night.”

“what could happen to her?” asked jim anxiously.

tellurium shrugged. “_quien sabe?_ put on yore pants, kid, we’re headin’
for town--me and you.”

tellurium hitched up the buckboard team, and they headed for pinnacle
city. tellurium knew where the voigt family lived; so he hammered on
the door until mrs. voigt came. mary had eaten supper with them, and
had left about seven o’clock. she had said that she was going home.

it was too late to seek more information; so they drove back to the
ranch, hoping that mary might be home, but she was not; so tellurium
went to the bunk-house and awakened the boys. they all gathered in
the main room, where they talked it over.

“she rode irish,” said tellurium. “he’d come home.”

the boys nodded.

“no one would harm mary,” tex parker said.

“maybe she fell off the horse, or was thrown,” suggested jim.

“mary is a good rider,” said dell howard, “and irish never bucked in his
life. mary broke him thataway.”

“all right,” said tex, “we’ve got to do somethin’. tellurium, you and
jim stay here--the rest of us go to town. we’ll search along the road,
and check on everybody in town. somebody must have seen her after she
left voigt’s place. c’mon boys.”

they hurried out, heading for the stable.

“you might as well go to bed, jim,” tellurium said. “no use settin’ up.”

“this,” replied jim, “is no time to sleep.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

it was a long night. dell howard and buck ives came back for breakfast
and to see if mary had returned.

“we can’t find any trace of her in pinnacle city,” dell told them.
“we’re makin’ up two posses for the search.”

“i’m goin’ with yuh,” declared tellurium. “i’d go crazy, not doin’
anythin’. jim can take care of the ranch.”

“i’d like to go along,” said jim.

“you’d do us more good right here,” said dell.

the three of them rode away in a cloud of dust. jim wandered around
the place, not knowing what to do. dell howard had tossed the ranch
mail on the table, and jim glanced at it. there was a paper from
phoenix, a small mail-order catalogue, and one letter in a plain
brown envelope. jim looked at the name, a puzzled expression on his
face. it was addressed to jim meade, care of the lazy h, pinnacle
city, arizona.

slowly he opened it, wondering who would write him. inside was a single
sheet of soiled paper, on which had been written in ink, the letters
faded;

you stick on this deal as agreed or she won’t never come back.

it was unsigned, undated. jim sat down in a chair and stared at the open
doorway, the paper clutched in his hand.

“stick to the deal, or she won’t never come back,” he whispered. “that
must be mclean’s work.”

he read the note again, holding it to the light, the ink was that
weak. he heard a horse walking across the yard outside. he shoved the
paper into his pocket and went to the doorway. it was irish, mary’s
saddle-horse, the reins tied up. irish nickered at him, and he went
out to the animal, which seemed to be all right.

jim tied irish to the porch-rail and went into the house. he had no
idea just what he was going to do, but he was going to do something. he
put on those hated, high-heel boots, borrowed an old belt and holster,
and buckled on his .41. anything was better than sitting there at the
ranch-house.

mary’s stirrup leathers were too short, but luckily, they were of the
buckle-type, and he was able to lengthen them. irish didn’t seem to
mind. in fact, the little bay gelding rubbed his nose against jim’s
elbow.

“you came home, irish,” said jim, “so why can’t you take me to mary?”

the horse made no audible reply. jim remembered that he had forgotten
to load the gun, so he filled the cylinder with stub-nosed .41’s,
replaced it in the holster, and headed down past the stable. he was
going back the way he had gone when blondy was shot. it might be the
wrong way, but it was the only way he had ever traveled on a horse.
anyway, he reasoned, with the hills full of searching riders, one was
as good as another.

it seemed that mace brown, the sheriff, had enlisted every rider in the
country, split them into three sections, and given each one a certain
territory. no one had any idea of what had happened to mary, nor where
to search. it was a blind trail, but the men were all anxious for
action.

ed mclean stood grimly in his office and watched the riders sweep out
of pinnacle city. he had been forced to play his ace-in-the-hole, and
he wondered how jim bailey had reacted. he was sure they had left
bailey at the lazy h, because he was not worth taking along on the
search. there was not a scrap of evidence to connect mclean with the
disappearance of mary deal and if the worst came to the worst--mclean
shrugged. after all, he must protect himself. the court would consider
that will tomorrow, and now he was very sure that jim bailey would not
back out of his part in the deception.

there was only one angle that worried mclean and that was the
possibility that jim bailey never received that letter. it was an
annoying thought, and he finally decided to ride out to the lazy h
and have a few words with bailey. he saddled his horse and rode out,
only to find the ranch-house deserted. he went in and looked around.
on the floor of the main room, near a table, was the opened envelope
in which the note had been mailed.

mclean put the envelope in his pocket, a grin on his fat lips. no one
would ever be able to identify the penciled writing on that envelope,
and as far as the note was concerned, mclean was not afraid of that.
after satisfying himself that no one was at the ranch, he rode back
to pinnacle city.




x


near sunset, jim bailey began to take stock of his situation. he had
ridden miles, but had not seen a human being and just now he had no
idea where he was. he had lost all sense of direction, but strangely
enough, was not worried. the fact that darkness comes swiftly after
sundown had no terrors for him.

he rode along a cow-trail, angling up around the point of a hill, and
saw a group of buildings below him. he drew up, partly screened by the
tall brush. the place consisted of a roughly-built ranch-house, of two
or three rooms, a series of tumble-down corrals and a huge, sway-backed
stable. two loose horses browsed around the littered yard.

as jim looked the place over, two riders came in from behind the house,
traveling slowly. suddenly one of them pointed out past the stable. a
moment later the other rider reined swiftly to the right and galloped
down past the corrals and drew up in the heavy brush between jim and the
ranch-house. jim could not see him, but sensed he had concealed himself.
the other rider dismounted, dropped his reins to the ground and went
into the house.

the actions of the two men seemed strange to jim bailey. in a few
minutes five riders came in past the stable and drew up at the house.
he saw the man come outside, bareheaded, and talk with them. after a
short conversation he went back, got his hat, climbed into his saddle,
and rode away with them.

jim felt that these five men were one of the searching parties and that
this man had joined them. but why did the other one hide from them, he
wondered? after a few minutes he saw the other man ride back past the
corrals, dismount at the house and go inside.

jim decided not to go down there. he had noticed there was a road
leading away from the ranch, and he surmised that it would lead to
pinnacle city. the man was in there quite a while, but finally came
out, carrying a sizable bundle, which he tied on the back of his
saddle. the man seemed to be keeping watch of the surroundings and
after he mounted his horse he kept turning his head, looking things
over.

then he turned his horse and headed back the same way they had come to
the ranch. why jim bailey elected to follow this man, he had no idea.
he rode off the point of the hill and swung in behind the horseman who
rode slowly, but in the opposite direction from pinnacle city.

jim bailey kept the man in sight through a long, brushy swale, following
a well-used cow-trail. it was growing darker all the time, but he could
still see the man after they went out of the swale. he was bearing off
across rough country, and jim was afraid he would lose track of him. he
didn’t dare hurry. objects became more indistinct, until suddenly he
realized it was dark. the last he saw of the other rider, he was heading
over some broken country, and holding a fairly straight line.

there was a full moon, but its effect was of little value this early
in the evening. jim stopped and tried to take stock of his position.
after looking around he had no idea which way he had come. irish was
perfectly willing to rest.

“if we go on,” jim said aloud, “we can’t be more lost than we are
now. just why i followed that man i don’t know, irish. well, he must
have a destination in mind and that is what i need most right now--a
destination.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

so irish went on, dodging brush and piles of rock, circling brushy
washouts, until jim suddenly realized that he was on the rim of a
mighty canyon. far across the canyon he could see moonlight shining
on the cliffs. somewhere a coyote lifted its voice in displeasure,
and jim’s spine tickled a little. another and still another added
their voices, until they sounded like gabbling geese.

jim turned irish gently and started along the rim. stunted pines and
huge, gnarled manzanitas grew along the rim. the flinty rock scraped
under irish’s shod hoofs. suddenly a horse nickered ahead. the animal
was tied to a manzanita snag, standing full in the moonlight. it was
the horse jim had followed.

he rode into the shadow of some small pines and dismounted. he tied
irish securely and went back to the other horse. the rider was not
there, but jim found an old trail down the sharp side of the cliff.
at that, it wasn’t much of a trail, but even in the moonlight he
could see the fresh scrapes of boot-marks.

jim looked the situation over carefully. twenty feet down, the trail was
in absolute darkness.

“suppose mary is down there,” he said to himself. “suppose they hid
her down there. why would that man go down the trail, unless he had
a very urgent reason--and what could the reason be? this man hid
from the posse, while the other went along. that, in itself, looked
suspicious.”

he looked at the moon, at the depths of the canyon, and added,
half-aloud:

“while asking questions, bailey--what in the devil are you doing up
here--all alone--and lost?”

shivering a little, he slid off the rim and started down the trail,
leaning in against the bank, carefully digging his high-heels into
the dirt and against the rocky projections. jim bailey was
frightened. the light had gone now, and he had to go slowly, feeling
his way. it seemed hours since he had left the rim. it was like
going down a slanting ladder, feeling ahead for each rung. something
scraped against his cheek, and he stopped, groping around with his
left hand. it was a rope.

it was larger than an ordinary lariat, and he was able to discover
that it was tied around some sort of an old snag. cautiously he
investigated. just below him the trail broke almost sheer. evidently
the rope was there to help men go down the impossible part of that
trail. below was only a dark mass, like a lot of houses piled on top
of each other.

jim took a deep breath, grasped the rope tightly, turned around and
went down slowly, his feet seeking purchase on the side of the wall.
it was hard on his hands, that rough rope, but he was making progress
slowly. he had gone down about a dozen feet, when he felt a heavy tug
on the rope. he thought for a moment that he had been discovered, but
a continuous tugging indicated that someone was coming up the rope.
jim thought wildly of trying to go back, but it was impossible. one
of his flailing legs caught around the rope, giving it one turn, and
he started down fast. the rope burned his hands, but he didn’t even
feel it. suddenly he crashed into somebody.

the rest of the descent was rather hazy for jim bailey. he lost control
of the rope with his left hand, his right was jerked loose and he went
into space for a few feet, landing in sliding rubble, to bring up
sharply on a smooth space, against a rock.

all he had heard from the other man was a startled curse when he had
crashed into him, but he knew the other was not far away. jim realized
he had cut his cheek, because the blood was trickling into his mouth,
and his hands felt as though they had been burned. still he was sure
no bones had been broken.

                   *       *       *       *       *

but jim bailey stayed put. he was in a dark corner and he was not going
to move until the other man started something. his gun had stayed in his
holster, and now he took it out. the feel of that gun was reassuring,
even if he knew he couldn’t hit anything with it.

then he heard the other man off to his right. he was cursing in an
undertone, his rough clothes rasping against rock. then he lifted his
voice to a conversational level and said:

“who is it? _quien es?_”

jim did not answer. the man cursed some more, flinging rocks into the
dark spots. one barely missed jim’s head, and it made him mad. he picked
up a shattered part of the rock and flung it back at the man. judging
from the response, it must have registered, but the man wasn’t sure from
what direction it had come.

“come out of there, or i’ll kill yuh!” rasped the man.

jim thought he had been seen, but a moment later the man fired a shot,
almost at right-angles to where jim was hidden. the man was evidently
searching out the darkest spots for his bullets. jim hunched lower, the
old .41 gripped in both hands.

_wham!_ the man fired again and the bullet smashed into the rocks almost
directly behind jim, who swung the muzzle of his gun, shut his eyes and
yanked the trigger. the .41 blasted flame, almost jumped out of jim’s
two-handed grip, and the hidden man yelped, either in pain or surprise.

“don’t tell me i hit something!” exclaimed jim, aloud.

the man didn’t say; he was cursing bitterly, and jim heard him rasping
around over the rocks. anyway, he wasn’t doing any more shooting. jim
eased his position cautiously, watching further up the rocks, where the
moonlight streaked them with blue. from the sounds it seemed as though
the man was trying to get away.

jim suddenly realized that if his enemy were able to get back to
that rope, and climb up to the trail, he might take the rope along.
without the rope it might be impossible ever to get back to the rim.
the thought made him panicky for a moment, and he crawled out into
the moonlit strip. but nothing happened.

trying to find his way back, he almost went over the sheer edge of the
cliff. peering down, he could see, possibly a hundred feet below, to
where the moonlight streaked the rocks. he edged his way back and a
loose rock, the size of a football, crashed beside him. several pieces
banged into him, but not against his head. quickly he slid into the
heavy shadow again, thankful to be alive, but realizing that the other
man was above him now.

jim worked cautiously now. he could hear the man once in a while, but
was unable to locate him exactly. jim suddenly realized how tired he
was. his face was swollen, his hands swollen too, and he had bruises
too numerous to mention. he found loose rock, which gave under his
knees as he crawled carefully upward. he remembered that he had landed
in loose rock and dirt. perhaps this was the place.

above him he could hear the rasp and scrape of what sounded like someone
sliding on rock. he stood up, and something brushed his arm. it was the
rope again. he grabbed for it, but it was yanked out of his hands. the
man had reached the trail and taken the rope.

in sudden desperation jim braced against the wall, cocked his gun,
gripped it in both hands and shot almost straight up. there was no
target, nothing to shoot at. he jerked back, losing his footing for
the moment, and a fraction of a second later a heavy object crashed
into him, and his consciousness went out in a shower of shooting
stars.




xi


he had no idea how long he was unconscious, except that the angle of
the moonlight had changed. he sat up, trying to remember where he was.
it was very confusing for a while, until memory came back. there was a
cut on his head, and a numb feeling in his legs, but the numbness was
caused by the twisted position he had occupied for an uncertain length
of time.

after a while he was able to move around, and he decided that no bones
were broken. just below him on a moonlit ledge was a bright object,
which turned out to be a perfectly good six-shooter, three chambers
loaded. to the right was the edge of the cliff, where he had almost
fallen in the darkness. suddenly he realized that the man had fallen
from the trail, crashed into him and gone over the edge.

it was a sickening thought, realizing he had shot a man. he went slowly
back on the ledge. the moonlight illuminated it now, and he stood
looking at it. he remembered something about the ancient cliff dwellers,
and wondered if this was one of the places where they had lived. some of
the ancient walls were still there. he crawled through a broken place
and into what might have been another room of the dwelling.

full in the moonlight, sitting against the wall, gagged and blindfolded,
her arms and legs tied, sat mary deal. very little of her face was
visible, but jim knew who she was. clumsily he took away the bandages
and ropes. his hands were too swollen to let him work fast or surely.

“how are you, mary?” he asked.

but mary wasn’t able to answer, because her jaws were cramped. he could
see the moonlight glitter on the tears down her cheeks, and he said,
“well, my gosh.”

she was trying to rub her jaw with her hands, but her hands wouldn’t
work. jim helped her, carefully massaging her jaw, until she could
speak.

“i’m all right, jim,” she said huskily.

but she wasn’t all right. returning circulation is painful. jim rubbed
her hands and fingers.

“where did you come from?” she asked.

“the ranch,” he replied. “i know where i came from, but i do not know
where i am.”

“this is destruction canyon, jim. the deepest in the country.”

“it looks deep,” he said. “did they hurt you?”

“no--not much. what became of that man? i heard shots--”

“i shot him,” said jim simply.

“you shot him?” her tone was incredulous.

“accidentally--but with certain intentions,” he said. “you see, he was
up on the trail, trying to take the rope away; so i--i sort of shot up
the rope, as you might say. he fell into the canyon. do you know who he
was, mary?”

“no. they caught me just outside town in the dark. they blindfolded me
and put a cloth in my mouth. i remember that rope. they tied it under
my arms and let me down here. but how did you find me, jim--you of all
people?”

“irish came home,” he said. “they all went hunting you and left me at
the ranch; so i rode irish. we followed that man.”

“they are hunting for me?” she asked.

“every man in the country. what is in that sack?”

mary didn’t know. jim dumped the contents and found that it was
food--canned food and some cold biscuits.

“i haven’t eaten since last night,” mary said. “maybe they were going to
feed me. but, jim, what do they think became of me?”

“they don’t know, mary--but i did. i’ll show you something.”

he took the letter from his pocket, spread it flat and lighted a match.
the paper was bare of any marks. jim stared at it until the match burned
his fingers.

“i don’t understand,” mary said.

“i do,” said jim wearily. “they used disappearing ink.”

“but what was it all about?” asked mary. “you said you knew what became
of me--”

“i--i didn’t know what--i only knew why, mary. i’ve got to tell you. my
name is jim bailey--not jim meade.”

“jim bailey? why--i thought you--”

“i know. listen mary--i’ll tell you the story. i’m not a bit proud. i
didn’t know you might get hurt. that wasn’t in the deal but i can see
why it was done.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

and then jim bailey, hunched on part of the doorway of an ancient
and departed race, told mary deal the whole tale, beginning in san
francisco, with cliff de haven and bob hawley, and extending up to
the time he left the lazy h ranch-house on mary’s own horse. jim did
not spare himself, he told it all.

mary didn’t interrupt him once. when he had finished, she said:

“jim, it is almost morning; we’d better get out of here--if we can.”

“don’t you want to eat something, mary?”

“not now--we have to hurry--before that other man comes here.”

“that’s right,” agreed jim. “i can’t hit a thing in the daylight.”

they managed to find their way back to the rope. the light was
better, and the climb did not look nearly as formidable as it did in
the darkness. mary went first, clinging to the rope, hooking her
feet over the projections, until she swung up beside the old snag,
out of breath, but safe. jim’s hands were in no shape to handle that
rope, but he managed to get up there, ready to collapse. they rested
a while, before climbing to the top.

“your hands are bleeding, jim! oh, i didn’t notice them before. and your
face is swollen!”

“i’m all right,” said jim wearily. “i’m alive and you’re alive--and that
is really something.”

“something i didn’t expect,” said mary quietly. “look, jim! the east is
rosy. it will soon be full daylight.”

“we better get to the top, mary.”

there was still a steep, dangerous climb, but they didn’t mind it, until
they reached the top, when their knees went weak, as they looked back
down the cliffs. irish was there, and so was the other man’s horse.

“you better ride irish, jim,” mary said, “we don’t know the other one.”

jim laughed weakly. “listen, woman,” he drawled, imitating archibald and
cactus spears, “i can ride anythin’ on four laigs. lemme at him.”

the horse snorted at jim as he started to untie him. suddenly mary
yelled a warning and jim whirled. a horseman was coming down through
the rocks near the rim, not over fifty yards away. he saw them and
jerked up quickly.

jim bailey had two guns now, but he drew the one he had found. the rider
fired one shot, and barked the tree to which the horse was tied, missing
jim bailey’s head by three feet.

then jim bailey fired--fired with one hand--his eyes open. the rider
jerked back in his saddle, the horse swung sharply and the rider dropped
his gun, grabbing at the saddle horn, as he spurred his horse savagely.
a moment later he was gone, racing back along the rim.

“no!” exclaimed jim bailey in amazement. “i can’t believe it!”

“you hit him!” exclaimed mary.

“yeah!” breathed jim bailey. “you know, mary--i was shooting at the
wrong kind of targets--tin cans.”

jim had a little trouble in mounting, but he made it, and drew up the
horse sharply.

“do you know the way to pinnacle city?” he asked.

“we are going to the ranch,” she said sharply. “you must have those
hands fixed up.”

“we are going to pinnacle city,” he declared soberly. “i want to look
at buildings--a street--people. not only that, but i’m due in court to
prove who i am. you lead the way.”

“yessir,” she said soberly. “follow me, please.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

the three groups of riders, out searching all night, were back at
pinnacle city eating breakfast, tired and discouraged. they were
finishing breakfast when tellurium and archibald came in from the
lazy h. tellurium shook his head sadly, in answer to their unspoken
question. archibald said wearily:

“that blamed dude ain’t even there. he ain’t been there all night
either, ’cause no bed has been slept in.”

“my gosh, have we lost him, too?” asked cactus.

tex parker said, “what horse did he take?”

“none i reckon,” replied tellurium. “ain’t no saddle missing, tex.”

ed mclean joined them and heard them discussing jim bailey. it was
almost time for the court to open. mclean’s eyes were a bit bleak, as
he said to tex parker:

“where would jim meade go, tex?”

tex shook his head. skeeter smith smiled wearily.

“you may not have a candidate for the lazy h, mclean,” he said.

mclean turned away and walked toward the frame building, which housed
the court of pinnacle city. the men looked curiously at skeeter.

“what did yuh mean, skeet?” cactus asked.

“they’re probatin’ that haverty will this mornin’, cactus.”

cactus nodded. the men were all too tired to care much. they stood
around, waiting for the sheriff to suggest their next move.

“boys,” he finally said, “i don’t know what to do next. we’ve covered
every likely place, and--” mace adams stopped, staring up the street,
where a lone rider had appeared. he seemed to be sitting drunkenly in
his saddle, as he came slowly into town.

“that’s ace haverty!” exclaimed cactus. “he wasn’t drunk, when he left
us last night.”

“this mornin’,” corrected the sheriff.

ace haverty pulled up in front of the court-house, tried to get out of
his saddle and fell off into the dirt. he staggered to his feet and
headed for the door of the court house.

“that’s queer,” declared the sheriff. “we better find out--”

ace had trouble, trying to open the door. the men came in behind him,
and he snarled:

“keep away from me--i’ll kill yuh!”

“he’s been shot!” whispered someone.

there were several men in the big court-room. the elderly judge was at
his desk, and mclean was with him, talking fast, asking the judge to
postpone probating the will, while he looked for jim meade, who had
disappeared. then the door was flung open and ace haverty staggered
in. his left shoulder and arm were blood-caked, his knees rubbery, as
he came haltingly toward the judge’s desk.

“what in the name of heaven!” gasped the judge.

ace haverty tried to say something, tried to hold his balance, but
suddenly collapsed in front of the desk. the men were crowding in
through the doorway. mclean’s face was the color of wood-ashes, as he
stared from ace haverty to the crowd.

from outside came a shrill yell.

“here’s mary deal and the tenderfoot!”

mclean’s move was totally unexpected. he whirled, leaped to an open
window, which opened on the main street, and dived through it like a
trained dog going through a hoop. he landed on his hands and knees on
the sidewalk, rolled into the dusty street, and landed against the legs
of jim bailey, who had just dismounted. the horse whirled away, but jim
bailey fell on top of the lawyer. a moment later jim bailey had a tight
grip on mclean’s two ears and was bouncing his face up and down in the
dust.

then strong arms reached through the dust cloud, lifted jim bailey away,
picked up the choking lawyer and carried him into the court house. jim
bailey followed them in. mary was there, and everybody was trying to
talk at once.

mclean, half-choked from the dust, pointed a shaking finger at jim
bailey and spluttered:

“he’s a liar! that man is an impostor! arrest--”

“shut up!” snapped the sheriff. “stop the noise! let’s get some sense
out of this. mary, what happened to you? the rest of yuh shut up and
let her tell it.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

mary told them all about it. she told them how jim bailey found her,
fought with an unknown man on the cliff and what he told her about
himself. the crowd was silent, until tellurium came galloping through
the doorway, waving a piece of paper.

“look at this, will yuh?” he yelled. “i--i just found it! it’s clint
haverty’s own writin’. it’s what he told mclean to put in the will! i
had it in my pocket and-- whoa, blaze!”

“you dirty thief!” screamed the lawyer. “you held me up! you--” mclean
stopped short, his eyes blinking tearfully.

“let me see that, mr. woods,” said the judge.

tellurium handed it to the judge, who peered at it closely.

“this is clinton haverty’s writing,” he said. “it appears to be
instructions regarding his will. it says, ‘give tex parker one thousand
dollars, tellurium and archibald five hundred apiece, one dollar each to
ace and dick haverty. the rest of the lazy h i wish to give to mary
deal. this includes the ranch, stock and everything i own, including any
money in the bank. that covers it. make it up like this right away.’”

the judge looked up at the crowd and said, “it is signed by clint
haverty, gentlemen. mr. mclean, what do you know about this paper?”

mclean shook his head.

“judge, the man lies,” skeeter smith said. “he worked with ace and dick
haverty, robbin’ the lazy h. they robbed the stage and took registered
mail, and they held up the bank and killed mr. estabrook!”

“i didn’t!” husked mclean. “those two ignorant fools took the mail. i
told them--they tried to rob the bank and--”

“thank you, mclean,” smiled skeeter. “i had the deadwood on yuh for
alterin’ the lazy h to the box four h, but i had to have you tell me
about the mail robbery. i figured out the brand deal right away, and
i suspected the mail robbery, but i had to wait for it to stew a
while.”

the judge fixed a baleful eye on jim bailey. “well, young man, what have
you to say for yourself?”

“not a thing, judge,” replied jim wearily. “i admit everything. i
told mclean i would not go through with the deception; so he had mary
deal kidnapped to force me to appear. you see, judge, after mary
disappeared, i received a note, saying that if i did not go through
with my agreement, she would never come back.”

“have you that note, sir?”

jim bailey smiled and drew a paper from his pocket.

“it was written in disappearing ink, judge--here is the paper.”

the judge examined the paper and placed it on his desk.

“young man, do you admit that you are not jim meade?”

“i insist that i am not, judge.”

“the kid is all right, judge,” said skeeter smith. “he started wrong,
but he’s all right now. mclean saw a chance to steal the lazy h.
haverty’s eyesight was bad, so mclean shuffled the wills, and tricked
haverty into signing the one he made to suit his own needs, givin’ the
lazy h to jim meade, instead of to mary deal. yuh see, judge, i knew
all the time that this boy was not jim meade.”

“you knew it all the time, sir? and just how did you know that this boy
was not jim meade?”

skeeter smiled. “because i am jim meade, judge. a few years ago i was
reported killed in an explosion.”

“i see. so you are jim meade. well, i--isn’t it rather coincidental that
you should come here at this particular time, sir?”

“not exactly, judge,” smiled skeeter. “you see, i am a deputy u. s.
marshal, sent here to investigate that mail robbery, but i use the
name of smith, especially when i smell a rat.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

mace adams snapped handcuffs on mclean who stared at them with stony
eyes.

tellurium said, “and they say the kid shot both of the haverty boys.
seein’ is believin’ on my part--i saw what he didn’t do to a tin can.
why don’t somebody get a doctor for ace haverty--he ain’t dead. c’mon,
jim--i’m takin’ you out to the ranch, where i can fix yuh up with some
horse-liniment.”

jim shook his head. “i’m sorry, tellurium,” he said, “the masquerade is
over. i won’t be going out to the ranch again.”

jim bailey limped toward the doorway, going out alone. no one said
anything, but they looked at mary, who got to her feet and limped after
him. they disappeared outside.

“i ain’t no bettin’ man,” archibald haas said, “but i’ll bet a dollar
agin a bent-nail that he goes out to the lazy h again.”

skeeter and tex parker stepped over to the open window, where mclean had
done his high-dive. mary and jim were only a few feet away, facing each
other.

jim said, “but, mary, i’m a cheat. i’ve lied to everybody. i’m just a
no-good hound. and you--”

“i’m glad you realize it,” said mary soberly. “you said that love had to
be honest--and you are honest, jim.”

“anybody want to take m’ bet?” asked archibald.

skeeter and tex turned away from the window, and skeeter said seriously:

“i don’t like to ruin what looks like a good bet, boys, but keep yore
bent nails in yore pockets.”


[transcriber’s note: this story appeared in the spring, 1948 issue
of _giant western_ magazine.]





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook the trail of deception ***


    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™

project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.

the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.

﻿the project gutenberg ebook of some forgotten pennsylvania heroines
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: some forgotten pennsylvania heroines

author: henry w. shoemaker

release date: october 9, 2025 [ebook #77017]

language: english

original publication: altoona: times tribune co, 1922

credits: charlene taylor, paul fatula and the online distributed proofreading team at https://www.pgdp.net (this file was produced from images generously made available by the internet archive/american libraries.)


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook some forgotten pennsylvania heroines ***





    some forgotten
    pennsylvania heroines

    an address by
    henry w. shoemaker
    at meeting of
    bellefonte chapter
    daughters of the american revolution
    bellefonte, pa., may 6, 1922

[illustration: woman’s face]

altoona

[illustration: union label]

published by times tribune co., 1922




some forgotten pennsylvania heroines


mrs. richard, and ladies of bellefonte chapter, d. a. r.

some months ago, in the daily newspapers, a dispatch dated washington,
d. c., propounded this question: “who were the greatest women in the
past history of pennsylvania?” without waiting for the readers of the
article to offer suggestions, the following names were mentioned:
betsey ross, rebecca biddle, lydia darrah, and lucretia mott. it would
seem a pity if this quartet should be regarded as the final estimate of
greatness in pennsylvania womanhood, despite the years of persistent
propaganda at work in favor of some of them. in the first place the
genuineness of betsey ross’s connection other than professional with
the first american flag has been frequently questioned, and were it
not for her social connections her claims would probably be entirely
outlawed; the same is the case with rebecca biddle and lydia darrah. in
this present age we are too prone to estimate a person’s greatness on
the basis of wealth and social position. if a wealthy woman delivers
a speech, writes a few paragraphs, makes a donation to charity, she
is accorded an exalted place in a sycophantic world. a woman’s social
position cannot be judged by her occupation; a servant girl may
come of an aristocratic family, and a millionaire’s wife, a common
vulgarian. it is women like lucretia mott, who have triumphed over
life’s obstacles, or broken the bonds of caste, and done something
uplifting and permanently worth while who will ultimately be classed as
the greatest of pennsylvania women. lucretia mott, preacher, teacher
and reformer, is too widely known to need further mention here, but
there are many other pennsylvania women, some scarcely mentioned in
history’s pages, who should be re-discovered. it may some day be a part
of the unselfish labors of the d. a. r. to establish them in their
proper places among pennsylvania heroines. in point of fame which
transcends the borders of the state, like in the case of lucretia
mott, we must not fail to mention mary jemison, known as the “white
woman of the genessee.” in beautiful letchworth park, near rochester,
new york, a handsome bronze statue, on a granite pedestal, testifies
the high regard in which this remarkable pennsylvania woman is held
by the people of the empire state. as a child, in 1755, mary jemison
was captured by indians at her parents’ home on marsh creek, franklin
county, and taken to ohio. later after the fall of fort duquesne, she
was given the chance to return to her family, but refused, preferring
the society of the indians. she first married a warrior named
sheningey, and after his death became the wife of hiakatoo, commonly
known as gardeau, a fighting indian whose name is not remembered in a
kindly manner by residents of the west branch valley. his part in the
tomahawking of the wounded at fort freeland, near milton in 1779, gave
him an unenviable reputation, but as to the merits of the case the
loyal “white woman of the genessee” is silent. as the wife of hiakatoo,
mary jemison became the mother of a large family, who inherited a
sort of kingship or overlordship of the senecas in western new york
state. the last “king” jemison died several years ago near red house,
on the allegheny river; in his lifetime he sold patent medicines
in pittsburgh, and exhibited a unique collection of indian relics,
including the silver war crowns of chiefs cornplanter, blacksnake,
and red jacket. mary jemison is principally remembered by her book of
memoirs which she dictated to james e. seaver, an historian, shortly
before her death, and which gives a vivid picture of indian warfare
and pioneer conditions during her long life. her influence on the
indians was beneficent, and her aim was always to bring the two races
together in friendly intercourse, her feeling being that, of the two,
the indians were the least savage and warlike. eastern pennsylvania can
claim another equally picturesque indian captive in regina hartman,
yet her unmarked last resting place in tulpehocken churchyard, near
stouchsburg, berks county, is known only to a few, among them dr.
walker l. stephen, of reading, the best-posted indian folk-lorist in
pennsylvania. if regina hartman had lived in new england or europe she
would rank as one of the great historical personages of all time, yet
pennsylvania claims only a mild acquaintance with her. for the benefit
of those present who have not heard of her strange story, we will
summarize it briefly. during an indian attack along the blue mountains,
in the vicinity of the present town of orwigsburg, regina, then nine
years of age, was carried into captivity by the indians, and for seven
years was taken from place to place by her captors. at last, after the
final peace of the french and indian war, in 1763, when mary jemison
elected to remain with the indians, a great army of white prisoners
were turned over to the british colonial forces, and sent east to
carlisle barracks, to be restored to their relatives. regina hartman’s
mother journeyed to carlisle, but out of the long line of sunburned
children who were marched past her could not recognize her long lost
daughter. the unhappy woman, in bitter disappointment after her long
trip, broke down and wept. her grief attracted the attention of colonel
henry bouquet, the brave deliverer of fort duquesne, a huguenot from
switzerland, who was in charge of the released captives, and addressing
her in pennsylvania german, he asked if there was any song that she
used to sing to her missing daughter in the old childhood days. the
poor woman recollected one particular hymn, and going along the lines
of refugees started to sing:

          “allein, and doch nicht ganz allein
          bin ich”----

it was there that a tall girl sprang from the crowd, and fell into her
mother’s arms. the reunion was complete and regina spent the remainder
of her life ministering to her mother’s comfort at their humble home
in northern berks county. after her mother’s death she lived alone,
becoming known locally as a saint, through manifold deeds of goodness
and charity. now she rests in an unmarked grave, and later historians
have attempted to class her as a myth, alongside of “molly pitcher,”
who luckily has been rescued from such obloquy by the prompt action
of the pennsylvania legislature and governor brumbaugh. in 1916, when
the handsome bronze monument to mary ludwig, known as “molly pitcher,”
a real daughter of the american revolution, was unveiled in the old
cemetery at carlisle, her identity was made sure by the engraving
of all her names, and her sobriquet, on the front of the granite
pedestal, so that she may rank for all time as one of the greatest of
pennsylvania heroines. mary ludwig, known as “molly with the pitcher”
and “molly pitcher,” was born in the palatinate, but brought as a
small child by her parents to berks county; later they moved to the
cumberland valley, where mary became a servant in the home of colonel
william irvine. at the time of the revolution she was the wife of
sergeant casper hays; at the battle of monmouth, when her husband, a
cannoneer was wounded she successfully took charge of the cannon; and
later when relieved carried water to the soldiers under fire. it is
said that general washington was an observer of her bravery, and made
her a sergeant by brevet. in the battle, one of her former admirers, a
man of wealth and position, was given up for dead, and tossed into a
trench for burial the next morning. despite the fatigues of the day,
molly crept out at dead of night, and carried him back to the lines,
and helped to nurse him back to health. after the war she returned to
carlisle, where sergeant hays died; later she married sergeant jerry
mccanley, a semi-invalid from shell shock. in her later years she
scrubbed the marble floors of the court house at carlisle, unable to
support her helpless husband and children on a pension of $40.00 per
year. for further information concerning this remarkable woman see the
article by rev. c. p. wing, in “pennsylvania magazine,” 1879, volume
iii, and judge e. w. biddle’s scholarly address delivered at the time
of the dedication of the monument. among the lesser known pennsylvania
heroines, somerset county is justly proud of peggy marteeny, the
daughter of henry marteeny, an old soldier of the revolution, of
huguenot antecedents. during an attack by indians along the old forbes
road, peggy was riding her spotted spanish pony through the woods
when she came upon a white man, badly wounded, and badly frightened,
running for dear life, closely pursued by redmen, who were brandishing
scalping knives. without a moment’s hesitation peggy sprang from her
horse, and put the white man on it, then giving it a few smacks across
the flanks, sent the animal galloping away, trusting to her own long
legs to escape the savage pursuers. somerset county was also the home
of rebecca statler and rhoda boyd, heroines of indian adventures.
near “molly pitcher’s” handsome moniment in the ancient cemetery at
carlisle, are the graves of hugh h. brackenridge, the distinguished
pittsburg jurist, and author of that amusing work “modern chivalry,” a
story much on the style of “don quixote”--and his wife, formerly the
pennsylvania german girl sabina wolfe. on one of judge brackenridge’s
horseback journeys through the mountains he noticed the graceful sabina
nimbly vaulting over a stake and rider fence, and fell in love with her
on the spot; athletic prowess still seems to be a compelling motive in
the awakening of love, for we have recently read in the papers of a
wealthy western youth who eloped with a show girl, who he said he fell
in love with after she had won a race on a pogo stick at the midnight
follies. the brackenridge-wolfe marriage turned out very well, so much
so that the unknown sabina soon became the social arbiter of the smoky
city. pennsylvania mountain girls are noted not only for their beauty,
but for their courage. kentucky accords a high place in history to the
small dark girl, mabel hite, whose forbears went from berks county to
the “dark and bloody ground” for her heroism in carrying water under
a heavy fire from hostile indians to the brave defenders of the fort
at bryant’s station, who were an earlier “lost battalion” and might
have perished of thirst but for the intrepid bravery of this young
pennsylvania girl. barbara frietchie, who some historians say was a
myth, but will ever be immortalized in whittier’s stirring poem, was
born in pennsylvania, but was taken to frederick, maryland, by her
parents at an early age. your speaker once asked general henry kyd
douglas of hagerstown, who was an aide to general “stonewall” jackson
during his famous ride through frederick town, if barbara frietchie
really lived. the old general replied that he knew barbara well, that
she was no myth, the only mythical part was that the flag which she
hung out was the stars and bars, and not the stars and stripes. perhaps
in the excess of his southern sympathies, this gallant old confederate
may have been temporarily color blind. another celebrated frontier girl
was frances slocum, the indian captive of the wyoming valley, whose
memory is splendidly perpetuated by the able historians of the north
branch valley; then there is elizabeth zane, the early love of daniel
boone, a pennsylvania frontier girl whose life was full of stirring
adventures, and whose relatives were the founders of zanesville, ohio;
there is jennie wade, the unhappy heroine of the battle of gettysburg,
shot while baking bread the same day that her lover was killed in
battle, and jane annesley, the beautiful red headed girl of the west
branch valley, whose auburn tresses were coveted by the warlike indian
skanando, and who followed her until he scalped her. she survived the
scalping many years, being still remembered by older residents about
lock haven as an aged woman hoeing corn, wearing a black scull cap. and
we must not forget to mention genevieve loverhill, the intrepid girl
scout and scalp hunter, also of the west brandy valley. the mother of
the immortal abraham lincoln, plain nancy hanks, was of pennsylvania
origin, like her husband thomas lincoln. by a strange coincidence
the early homes of the lincoln, hanks, and boone families were close
together in eastern berks county. montgomery, chester, and berks county
have vied with one another as the early home of the hanks family,
but rev. j. w. early, a venerable clergyman of reading, writing on
the 100th anniversary of “father abraham’s” birth, in 1909, in the
reading times, stated that the family originated in berks county, and
the early spelling of the name was hanck, whereas in chester county
there is a family called hanke, possibly of a different stock. nancy
hanks, the typical pioneer mother, occupies an outstanding place in
the nation’s history, and we can feel closer to her, and her ideals,
by reckoning her as one of our pennsylvania women. dr. stephen, before
mentioned, tells us that jane borthwick, to whom robert burns, in his
youth, dedicated several lovely poems, and who later emigrated to
pennsylvania, is buried in womelsdorf, berks county. we cannot close
this rambling discourse without mentioning a little known centre county
heroine, mary wolford, for whom young woman’s town, now ruthlessly
re-named north bend, and young woman’s creek, now ruthlessly polluted
by tanneries, are named. while encamped with her parents, formerly from
buffalo valley, near the great hollow buttonwood tree, below milesburg,
where the spartan indian chief woapalannee, or bald eagle, is said
to have slept standing up, this fierce warrior fell in love with the
tall, slim and beautiful pioneer girl. she was indifferent to his
advances, being engaged to james quigley brady, the “young captain of
the susquehanna,” a younger brother of the famous captain “sam” brady.
bald eagle managed to have the “young captain” scalped, which caused
his death, and later captured mary wolford, and started north with
her, towards the old boone road, leading to new york state. somewhere,
beyond the creek, which now bears her name, the lovely mary broke loose
from her captors, although a wooden gag was in her mouth, and her hands
were tied behind her back. boldly she plunged into the stream, which
was swollen by a flood; gagged and her arms helpless, she was carried
off by the swift current and drowned. days afterwards her body was
washed ashore at northumberland, near where young brady was buried, and
the lovers sleep their long sleep side by side. there are many more
forgotten pennsylvania heroines, but the list just given will suffice
for the present. if we can honor these, as are their due, we will have
enhanced the cause of pennsylvania history and helped to place it
alongside that of new york, new england, the south, and other sections
where deeds of worth and valor are recognized. all of these forgotten
women were brave, courageous, simple and god fearing, well worthy to
serve as a high ideal for our young girlhood. they also show that the
noblest traits are found in the humblest homes, that womanhood can be
brave and intrepid just as much as man, that there are self-made women
as well as self-made men. some day let us hope that in the rotunda
of the capitol at harrisburg, purged of its group of professional
politician statues, or some hall of fame specially constructed for
the purpose, we can gaze upon lifelike effigies in marble of lucretia
mott, mary jemison, regina hartman, molly pitcher, peggy marteeny,
mabel hite, frances slocum, mary wolford, and above all nancy hanks,
typical of the most exalted heights to which womanhood can attain,
unaided, many of them untaught, but pure in patriotism, pure in heart,
the bright galaxy of the glory of pennsylvania womanhood. we cannot
honor them too highly, we cannot praise them extravagantly enough, for
they are milestones in the normal development of our feminism. this
great work is going on. that women of equal worth are being born under
similar conditions and are alive today, let us but remember that jane
addams, the daughter of a berks county innkeeper, has done more for her
sex, and for humanity in general than almost any other woman living,
and carries out fully the lofty standard that pennsylvania sets for its
womanhood.

[illustration: woman]




transcriber’s notes

    p. 4, hyphenation of “folk-lorist” has been retained.
    p. 6, “horeback” changed to “horseback”.
    p. 7, period spelling of “moniment” (monument) has been retained.
    p. 7, “pensylvania” changed to “pennsylvania”.
    p. 9, “loftly” changed to “lofty”.





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook some forgotten pennsylvania heroines ***


    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™

project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.

the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.

﻿the project gutenberg ebook of madri.... per ridere
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: madri.... per ridere
        romanzo

author: cesare tronconi

release date: october 9, 2025 [ebook #77018]

language: italian

original publication: milano: galli e omodei, 1877

credits: barbara magni and the online distributed proofreading team at https://www.pgdp.net (this book was produced from scanned images of public domain material from the google books project.)


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook madri.... per ridere ***


                            cesare tronconi


                          madri.... per ridere


                                romanzo



                                 milano
                     galli e omodei, editori-libraj
                  galleria vittorio emanuele, 17 e 77.
                                   —
                                 1877.




                          proprietà letteraria

                      stab. tip. molinari e socj.




                                   a
                            felice cameroni

                                   a
                           ferdinando fontana




allora non si usavano ancora i _treni-omnibus_.

quattro becchini o quattro conoscenti andavano bravamente sotto la bara
e via se la portavano al cimitero.

non di rado, i latori di voi — per modo di dire — di voi
presente-passato, erano precisamente quegli amici o parenti che vi
avevano rotto le scatole al punto da ridurvi fra quelle assi e dicevano
di portarvi con piacere per consolarsi del dolore di avervi ammazzato.

con ciò non si vuol fare alcuna maligna allusione a coloro che quella
mattina portavano o accompagnavano un cataletto al più lontano dei
carnaj suburbani. — non osiamo scrivere: _all’ultima dimora_, dopochè
la stoltezza umana, non contenta abbastanza di tormentare certuni
quando sono vivi, non vuol lasciarli tranquilli neanche quando sono
morti. stoltezza tanto di buona fede, che piuttosto di non trasportare
qualche osso, se non ne trova, supplisce con surrogati.... e, in un
caso disperato, è certo che ne fabbricherebbe apposta!

il dolore di quegli amici e parenti era proprio sincero. al defunto
avranno forse goduto più d’un pranzo, n’avranno sempre parlato bene
il meno possibile, ne avranno corteggiato la moglie, avranno giocato
dei tiri alla sua borsa — questo che cosa significa? — ma egli era
stato tanto buono — tutti ora n’erano persuasi — e la di lui fine tanto
miseranda e acerba — aveva venticinque anni! — che nessuno, per quanto
apatista, poteva non sentire compassione. alcune guance, specialmente
di donne, erano rigate di lagrime.... ed erano lagrime sincere....
perchè il morto non aveva dato ordine di pagarle.... e i superstiti
meno ancora.

entrato il convoglio nel camposanto, si diresse verso la fossa
assegnata al nuovo ospite e intorno a quella si dispose in cerchio,
attendendo. si sapeva che un amico doveva leggere alcune parole.

infatti un giovinotto sui trent’anni levò un foglio, tossì, diede
un’occhiata in giro, compose il volto a gravità dottorale e finalmente
cominciò:

  «aveva ragione leopardi, il quale scrisse:

                             «amore e morte
      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      «cose quaggiù sì belle
      «altre il mondo non ha, non han le stelle,

  «ma doveva aggiungere che, quando si perde il primo di questi beni,
  l’altro è l’unica speme che ci resta.... e che l’affrontarla è pur
  una gioja sovrumana....

  «colla morte soltanto ci è dato salvarci dal dolore!

  «ma chi ci avrebbe detto solo domenica scorsa, quando, ricco di
  salute e di forza, tripudiava con noi ad agape fraterna, che oggi
  avremmo dovuto riunirci intorno alla sua tomba per dargli l’estremo
  _vale_?

  «chi ci avrebbe detto, quando egli ne parlava commosso delle sue
  domestiche gioje....»

qui l’oratore — se volete dar tal nome a chi leggeva con coraggio non
invidiabile uno dei soliti stravecchi esercizj di retorica — alzato lo
sguardo a caso, mentre prendeva fiato, s’interruppe repentinamente....
e additò nella direzione dell’uscita del cimitero, dove erano apparse
due ombre negre. tutti guardarono ed ebbero un moto di sorpresa e di
repulsione.

l’oratore, allora, con voce bassa e severa, mormorò:

— sarebbe un profanare questo sepolcro il permettere che quelle due
sciagurate avessero ad unirsi a noi per ascoltare l’espressione del
nostro dolore.... andiamo.... e che dio.... —

egli s’interruppe per interrogare i visi degli astanti, e vedendoli
tutti addolorati ripetè con forza e sensibile reticenza:

— .... che dio abbia di loro pietà.... se pur la meritano. —

e i convenuti si sciolsero silenziosamente, le teste chine,
disperdendosi fra le croci ed evitando — taluni non senza affettazione
— di incontrarsi colle due donne che con la loro comparsa inattesa
avevano disturbato la mesta cerimonia.




una vecchia lettera, che fa parte dei documenti da noi raccolti prima
di accingerci a questo lavoro, contiene informazioni sur uno dei
personaggi principali del racconto — informazioni che noi crediamo
dover nostro di dare in tutta la loro crudezza per risparmiare a
certi benevoli la fatica d’accusarci della malsana, prava compiacenza
d’inventar caratteri ultraperversi.

grazie a quel dio che ci ha creati, della perversità ve n’è quassù fin
che se ne vuole, e non c’è proprio alcuna possibilità d’inventare nè
più nè peggio di quello che già esiste.

queste informazioni dovevano servire — pare — per qualcuno che aveva
delle idee oneste, ossia conjugali — se su maddalena o sulla di lei
figlia, non sappiamo, la lettera non portando data — e chi le diede era
certamente ben informato.

crediamo fosse anche un galantuomo.... ma su tal punto penserete quel
che vorrete.

copiamo:

  «leggi adunque bene!

  «maddalena è una di quelle disgraziate creature che non si
  dovrebbero mai conoscere, anzi neppur potere sospettare possibili.
  il solo sapere che simili esseri non sono una finzione da
  romanziere, ma esistono realmente ed agiscono.... è una corruzione
  del nostro spirito e del nostro cuore, perchè, alla fede nel bene,
  sostituisce il dubbio terribile che quaggiù vi siano solo gradi
  maggiori o minori di depravazione — più o meno abilmente mascherati
  — e che il bello morale assoluto sia una pura fola.

  «quando si è conosciuta una maddalena, tu potrai incontrare
  anche una vergine angelica.... garantita e ti verrà egualmente
  il sospetto che quell’involucro celestiale racchiuda un’anima di
  fango. concederai che quell’anima non ha ancora agito secondo la
  sua natura, ma dirai subito che gli è soltanto perchè sinora è
  sempre stata nell’impossibilità d’agire.... e che del resto aspira
  unicamente e con tutto l’ardore a quell’istante in cui potrà agire
  liberamente.

  «insomma, quando si è conosciuta una maddalena.... la donna — nel
  consolante significato che noi avevamo sempre dato a tale parola,
  perchè va unito a quegli esseri che portano i soavi nomi di madre,
  di sposa, di figlia — non esiste più.... esiste soltanto una
  spaventevole macchina, la quale stritola tutto che di umano ha la
  sventura di toccarla. allora tu non vorresti più essere nè figlio,
  nè marito, nè padre — perchè maddalena è il male. il male cinico,
  audace, insultante, aggressivo, perchè non solo vuol essere....
  non solo vuol parer tale, ma aggiunge la sfida a tutto ciò che è
  bene.... come a dire: io ho il coraggio di essere quello che sono,
  perchè è così che si deve essere, e tu, sedicente virtù, non sei
  che ipocrisia o imbecillità.

                                 * * *

sì, maddalena fu il male, ma avrebbe forse potuto anche essere il bene,
se nel punto più importante, e quasi sempre decisivo nell’esistenza
d’una donna, ella non avesse ricevuto una di quelle lezioni che
sconvolgono mente, cuore e sangue, e vi trasformano un individuo di
punto in bianco.

diciamo questo, col solito _forse_, più per tentar di spiegare che
per rendere simpatico il personaggio, nonostante i suoi torti....
lasciando che le lettrici la giudichino come meglio credono — a voce —
per confessare poi fra sè stesse, se nella tale e tal’altra circostanza
avrebbero agito in modo diverso o egualmente o peggio.

                                 * * *

se la morte di cesare fu preceduta e quindi, come dissero,
preannunziata da stranissimi fenomeni — la nascita di maddalena fu
accompagnata da un incidente che fornì materia a dir molti spropositi
alle varie donnicciattole che, raccolte nella cucina, una sera di
gennajo, attendevano ansiosamente quel primo vagito, il quale doveva
annunziare l’arrivo, nel mondo, del messia di casa papetti. — fra
parentesi diremo che quel messia, per essere il benvenuto, doveva
essere una femmina. così volevano mamma e papà, e guai a lui se si
fosse presentato colla solita sconvenienza che si nota nei maschi.

or bene, nel punto stesso in cui papà ildebrando, spalancato con furia
l’uscio della cucina comparve gridando gongolante e lagrimante:

— è una fiiiglia!... è una fii.... — proprio allora, con gran fracasso,
volò in frantumi un vetro della finestra, sfondato da un grosso gatto
nero che cadde sulla tavola apparecchiata pel desinare.

ma siccome, precipitando, aveva rovesciato bottiglie e bicchieri....
scoppiò un gridò generale acutissimo di spavento e di furore, e tutte
le mani si congiunsero in un: santa madonna! — il gattone allora,
esterrefatto per la sua stessa caduta, alla vista di un paese nuovo,
di tante ignote femmine e di quell’uomo che già alzava minaccioso un
bastone.... piroettò roteando i giallissimi occhi, cercando anelante
una via di scampo — ma non vedendone alcuna, perchè già tutti gli
si serravano addosso, da vero gatto spiccò un salto trasvolando una
spanna sopra la cervice del signor papetti, la di cui legnata, non più
trattenibile ormai, rovinò sulla tavola con immenso frastuono di piatti
e di bicchieri infrangentisi contro il suolo.... e, quel che portò al
colmo il terrore degli astanti, colla rottura dell’ampolla dell’olio e
della saliera, il cui contenuto si sparse tutto sulla tovaglia.

pur troppo il disastro fu completo, e noi rinunciamo a descrivere
la scena di desolazione che susseguì, a riferire le bestialità che
proruppero da quelle bocche.

vi basti sapere fra le altre lepidezze che il gatto nero «era
certamente venuto dall’inferno per portar l’anima alla neonata, e che
l’olio e il sale versati erano il più certo segno che grandi sventure
attendevano casa papetti.»

si giuocarono naturalmente molti biglietti al lotto, che dovevano
guadagnare immancabilmente.... e infatti non colpirono nemmeno un ambo.

del gatto nero non si ebbero più notizie.

                                 * * *

ildebrando papetti era un impiegato di dogana che dal governo percepiva
un onorario molto modesto, ma che sapeva aiutarsi. certi mercanti
della piazza, che lo trovavano compiacente nelle dichiarazioni delle
merci da daziarsi, gli dimostravano la loro gratitudine con strette di
mano che gli facevano un piacere infinito. la malignità non cerchi più
sottintesi di quelli che vi sono. del resto, prima vi fu da pensare
ai viziucci della gioventù — dopo, a prender moglie — in seguito, a
mantenerla bene — più tardi, ai nascituri — dunque!

a quarant’anni sposò caterina, la figlia della portinaja, che ne aveva
trenta.

bella coppia!

egli alto, secco, già curvo, già grigio, avvizzito, affumicato
dall’eterna pipa di porcellana, colle occhiaje muffite — sempre
strozzato da un fazzoletto bianco a sestupla pressione — senza
occhiali, tuttavia.

ella di media statura — quasi — grassoccia, linfatica, col volto di
un roseo incerto, giornaliero, che ad un conoscitore avrebbe dato
da pensare, coi capelli biondi di una rarità incontestabile, con due
pupille che vi parevano bianche e con un seno.... molto morale — alla
qual moralità di solito si preferisce la turgida immoralità.

ma era buona e cretina come dovrebbero essere tutte le donne destinate
alla parte di massaja.

dire le sue orazioni, andare a messa, predica e benedizione, ai tridui,
alle novene ai mesi di maria, osservare le feste di precetto, dire la
sua terza parte del rosario quando occorreva o.... per passar la sera,
non sapere che cosa è un libro, meno il _manuale di filotea_ o altro
della stessa forza, non avere un’idea di ciò che è spirito, aver orrore
della parola capriccio, tener in bell’ordine la casa, essere sempre
pulita, ma vestita come una lavandaja vecchia, fare il suo dovere
conjugale, applicare bene mignatte, polentine e.... altre consolazioni
— insomma, un ideale!

e per questo si amavano, perchè innanzi tutto egli era un uomo
dell’ordine, ossia di quell’ordine che aveva trovato fatto venendo al
mondo.

questo amore tuttavia, benchè si conoscessero già da cinque anni,
quando si sposarono, chi sa se sarebbe mai nato senza un certo
avvenimento che stiamo per sapere.

v’era una gran stima reciproca — egli ammirava, anzi, il di lei amore
al lucido — ed ella il di lui vivere regolato come il suo orologio e
specialmente i costumi morigerati.

in cinque anni egli non aveva ricevuto nè una lettera nè una donna.

ma siccome ella pareva non avesse mai avuto tempo di pensare all’amore
— ed egli vi aveva forse rinunciato — e fors’anche a motivo dell’abisso
fra le due posizioni — il fatto sta che con tutta la stima e tutta la
facilità di vedersi e parlarsi — egli, più che «buon giorno» o «buona
sera», oppure «che tempaccio!», o «bello quel merlo!», non aveva mai
detto.

una mattina ildebrando, uscendo di casa, vede sotto il portico caterina
che piange disperatamente, attorniata da alcune portinaje e serventi
della vicinanza, le quali fanno del loro meglio per consolarla.

— perchè piange, signora caterina? — fa egli appressatosi.

ma siccome caterina singhiozza senza poter parlare, una donna dice:

— piange perchè le è morta la mamma stanotte.... sicuro, poverina.

— oh! — ma se stava benissimo jeri sera!

— mah! un colpo....

— oh!... questo mi fa proprio dispiacere.... basta! si faccia
coraggio.... e pensi che, giù, un po più presto.... un po più lardi....
pur troppo! — e ildebrando se ne va brontolando e scrollando capo e
spalle.

per tre giorni il nostro impiegato è preoccupato, concentrato,
accigliato — tanto, che i colleghi gli domandano se medita un delitto.

— forse.... se lo posso! — risponde con sorriso sinistro.

i colleghi non vi badano e dicono:

— bene.... se mai ha bisogno di qualche ajuto....

— non dubitino, signori..., basto io. —

il suo accento è beffardo — gli amici si guardano e se ne vanno,
formando dei dubbj sullo stato di quel cervello.

ma niente paura. ildebrando si presenta il quarto giorno col volto
rischiarato, sereno, anzi ilare, il che è fenomenale in lui.

gli è che un’ora prima, entrato dalla caterina, le ha detto tutto a un
fiato, passando dal lei al voi:

— caterina, voi ora non potete più da sola continuare a fare la
portinaja. è una grama vita.... e non resistereste, perchè, se siete
giovane ancora, non siete niente affatto robusta.... e mi farebbe
male se vi vedessi soffrire. — vi propongo una cosa. voi siete sola al
mondo.... e solo sono io.... se non vi spiace.... andiamo! venite su
con me al terzo piano.

— a servir lei? — ha fatto caterina, sorpresa, con uno sguardo e un
accento pieni di riconoscenza.

— a servir me!? ma vi pare che io potrei proporvi una cosa simile? che
direbbe il mondo?

— ma dunque? — e il di lei viso esprimeva un’ansia estrema.

— ma dunque, voi siete una buona donna.... sì.... volevo dire una brava
ragazza. se avete la stessa opinione di me.... sposatemi ed è bell’e
finita.

— oh! signor papetti!... — ha esclamato la poveretta tutta lagrimosa,
colla mente quasi fuor di questo mondo a quel colpo fulmineo di
fortuna, dopo tanta sventura.

— non ditemi più papetti, ditemi il mio nome.... sicchè quale risposta
mi date?... fate presto, perchè è tardi, e coll’ufficio non si
scherza.... sicchè.... sì?

— oh! signor ildebrando.... io sarò la sua serva....

— che serva d’egitto!... mia moglie...! su.... su.... che diavolo fate?
inginocchiarvi? — e, commosso anche lui, ha detto in fretta: — la cosa
resti fra noi, per ora; penserò io a tutto.... voi non dovete neanche
muovervi. per domani vi sarà una portinaja nuova.

— come! di già provveduto?

— e volevate forse che vi lasciassi qui un giorno solo ancora?

— ah!...

— addio! —

tre mesi dopo ildebrando conduceva al suo domicilio la sposa, e siccome
egli era un po.... brillo, trovò naturale, aprendo l’uscio, di dire a
caterina:

— questa è la casa.... ora bisogna mettervi dei figli. —

ma i figli si fecero aspettare.... cinque anni.

dirvi che lei era sospirosa, e lui di pessimo umore, vedendo scorrere
tanto tempo inutilmente, è dir poco.

— ma sono io.... o sei tu? — grugniva egli di tanto in tanto.

— tutti e due — mormorava caterina sommessamente, poi con
rassegnazione! — è il signore che vuol così....

— il signore! — gridava allora ildebrando picchiando col pugno sul
tavolo, ma non finiva, perchè essa impallidiva sempre orribilmente alle
bestemmie.

ma chi faceva montare in bizza il povero papetti, al punto, certi
giorni, da perderne l’appetito e diventare verdognolo, era il suo
capo-ufficio, il quale quando era di buon umore si degnava chiedergli
notizie «della sua numerosa prole, se studiavano, se ora lasciava
finalmente riposare quella povera donna....» insomma, una canzonatura
non più finita.

ma gli è che quando ildebrando aveva preso moglie, aveva promesso mari
e monti in fatto di paternità, e invece....

— vede.... — gli disse un giorno il suddetto capo-ufficio — se avesse
studiato, da ragazzo, la grammatica, queste cose non le succederebbero.

— come dice?...

— ma sì.... nominativo come è, non sa essere dativo abbastanza da poter
diventar genitivo; così merita l’accusativo d’essere all’ablativo, e si
vede ch’ella non era vocativo pel matrimonio.

— grazia! grazia! — gridò l’infelice che, come avrete capito, non era
certo un uomo di spirito, e fuggì più curvo del solito come oppresso
del ridicolo che si rovesciava su lui.

ma quando una certa mattina d’aprile, mentre ildebrando stava calzando
gli stivali, udì un grido di gioja che veniva dalla camera attigua — e
domandato burbero: «che cosa c’è?» sentì rispondere: «ci sono!» e seppe
subito cosa voleva dire quel _ci sono_ — non potè a meno di esclamare
pensando al suo capo-ufficio: son vendicato! — e non appena lo vide,
gli disse, ma lentamente, con tutta l’ironia che gli riuscì di trovare,
assaporando a centellini la sua vendetta:

— sa.... sa.... mia moglie vuol farmene una delle sue.... pare che
saranno due. pazienza! —

e non mancò di ripeterglielo.... tutti i giorni! per quel tal numero di
mesi.

il capo-ufficio se la pigliò in pace e attese l’istante della rivincita
che non mancò.

quando papetti venne ad annunziare che gli era nata una figlia, il
capo-ufficio gli disse con accento di scherno schiacciante:

— pœuh!... anche quella è nata in sbaglio....

— come, in sbaglio?!

— o sarà.... merce di contrabbando.... — non c’era cattiveria; bisogna
ricordarsi che parlava un doganiere.

— come, contrabbando?!

— la sfido.... ad averne un’altra.

— e io accetto!

— vedremo! —

il capo-ufficio fu profeta — non si vide più niente — ma non se ne
parlò altro. il gioco era già stato abbastanza lungo, e, diciamolo
pure, d’una gajezza lagrimevole.




un buon osservatore, che avesse potuto seguire maddalena, passo per
passo, ne’ suoi primi anni, avrebbe scrollato il capo e detto per lo
meno: non ci capisco nulla!

non che ella fosse, come si dice dei bimbi, «cattiva» — tutt’altro — ma
era qualche cosa di peggio — non era, non fu mai una bambina.

guardate quale anomalia.

nei primi sette mesi succhiò da sola tanto latte che avrebbe bastato
benissimo per due. fortunatamente la balia ne aveva per quattro.

succhiare e poi.... succhiare — pochissimo dormire — un dimenarsi
senza posa — una grande insofferenza delle fasce ed una maggiore
dell’oscurità. luce, aria! — tollerava solo e per pochi istanti ancora
le braccia della balia.

d’essere presa da altra gente nè baciucchiata, non voleva saperne.
rotolarsi sull’erba, nella polvere e, a preferenza, nel fango, ecco i
suoi gusti.

nell’ottavo mese dimostrò, con sorpresa di tutti, una certa ripugnanza
al capezzolo. nel susseguente s’era già svezzata da sè. di dieci mesi
passeggiava, e una magnifica foresta nera le copriva la testolina.

ad un’età in cui i bimbi non si sa quasi neanche che esistano, ella
era la meraviglia della corte, che le diede ben presto il soprannome di
_tosa di bronzo_.

e lo meritava. chi aveva mai avuto occasione di notare ch’ella
soffrisse o godesse? chi aveva mai veduto una sua lacrima o un suo
sorriso?

seria, con movimenti ricisi e sicuri — non desiderava, voleva — non
chiedeva, prendeva — occorrendo, strappava — il suo capriccio era il
suo diritto. al di lei cospetto, i bimbi più deboli sentivan paura —
i più forti, rispetto o stupore — e i grandi, si lasciavan soverchiare
per divertimento.

la caterina avendo sofferto una lunga malattia in quel tempo, fu forza
lasciar maddalena presso la balia fin verso i due anni.

quando la madre potè finalmente farsela portare in città, fu deciso
che lo stesso giorno dell’arrivo della balia sarebbe anche quello della
di lei partenza. si temeva che se si lasciavano prendere alla lena le
abitudini cittadine nelle braccia della balia, venendo poi quel giorno
in cui si dovrebbe pur separarle, la lena non avesse a far il diavolo e
a costar noje e insonnie infinite.

qual vano timore! la povera donna piangeva staccandosi dalla sua
maddalena, e la sua maddalena, infastidita, le volgeva le spalle per
occuparsi d’un cagnolino che faceva una gran festa ai suoi dolci.


chi sa che cosa c’era in quel cervellino! si può dire che fino ai
quindici anni visse come una lumaca, indifferente per tutto quanto
l’attorniava, per tutto quello che interessava gli altri, cominciando
dal giocare e dai giocatoli, non curante persino di sè stessa, ad un
punto che sembrava nata senza vanità!

obbediva come una macchina ai genitori, riceveva le loro carezze, ma
non le ricambiava che richiesta, asciutta, fredda.... per liberarsi
d’una noja.

una cosa da morir dal ridere.... quel soldo di cacio si dava alla
solitudine e alla meditazione.

quando cominciò a frequentare la scuola, in quella gran festa
dell’infanzia che è appunto la scuola, avrebbe forse potuto aprirsi
il calice di quell’anima, ma una circostanza impedì che alcun raggio
d’amore vi cadesse sopra, e così restò sempre chiuso.

pertanto non potè mai gustare alcuna di quelle gioje, non potè mai
sentirsi trasportata da alcuno di quegli entusiasmi infantili che
amicano una piccola creatura all’umanità e ne foggiano a poco a poco un
essere sociale.

per maddalena volevasi una scuola con una maggioranza di ragazzine
della di lei condizione, all’incirca.

là, non essendovi quelle disuguaglianze che tanto fanno soffrire i
bambini, avrebbe trovato sorrisi, amicizie, trasporti, ed ella si
sarebbe forse, o almeno in buona parte, trasformata.

l’importante è dare o cambiare l’intonazione ad un carattere — il tempo
fa poi il resto.

invece i genitori, che ne volevano fare una damina, la misero in una
scuola nella quale non v’erano appunto che damine in erba. — «così —
dicevano — prenderà subito le maniere della migliore società e avrà
delle amiche le quali le faranno onore e potranno anche giovarle col
tempo.»

giustissimo! ma allora bisognava mandarla vestita con eleganza,
all’ultima moda, e farla accompagnare dal servitore o dal maggiordomo.
invece la mandavano vestita con una economia ridicola, di stoffe
che sapevano di rigattiere un miglio lontano e in cui si vedeva, ad
occhio nudo, la lotta accanita dell’ingegnosità materna contro i colpi
del tempo, e contro la crescente pressione delle membra in continuo
sviluppo.

permettevano che l’accompagnasse una donna senza sciallo, senza
cappellino, la quale pareva una serva, aveva i tradizionali movimenti
della portinaia frettolosa e curiosa, e che maddalena — orrore! —
confessava essere sua madre.

ma era una mamma quella? tutt’al più era una stonatura nel genere madri.

maddalena produsse proprio lo stesso effetto che un cane in chiesa,
in quella scuola, e come un cane fu trattata — ma stavolta il cane non
guaì, nè si raccomandò alle gambe.

i bambini, di solito, quando si trovano esposti al dileggio e alle
busse dei compagni prepotenti, perchè ricchi o nobili, o hanno forze
per vendicarsi, e allora.... guai ai dileggiatori, guai ai maneschi — o
sono troppo deboli per reagire, e allora si rassegnano alla loro sorte
e cercano ogni mezzo per renderla meno dura....

si fanno quindi umilissimi servitori delle loro eccellenzine. se ne
ricevono un calcio od uno schiaffo, frenano una lagrima e trovano un
sorriso — se sentono una bestialità, e ne sentono molte, gridano:
«oh, bello!» — se vedono una crudeltà, ridono a crepapelle, e così
via, sinchè a furia di umiliazioni, di strisciamenti, di adulazioni,
di leccature.... riesce loro di ingraziarsi qualcuno di quei piccoli
semidei, sotto l’egida dei quali possono poi restare impunemente anche
cogli altri, che li tollerano per lo meno fino al giorno degli esami.
s’intende che l’indomani di quel giorno, so loro avviene d’incontrarli,
non li ravvisano più.

maddalena non era nè un lupo nè un agnello, ma provò che, se avessero
voluto, per caso, farne un agnello, avrebbero trovato il lupo.

quando — e fu subito — si vide noncurata e derisa da tutte quelle dame
in sessantaquattresimo, quando sentì il coro di scherni e di motti su
quella «portinaja di sua madre,» le guardò di traverso — niente altro
— e fece chiaramente intendere col suo contegno che voleva essere
un’estranea per tutte, evitare qualunque contatto.

questo, sulle prime, non garbò alle signorine, che volevano, non già
una ribelle, bensì una schiava, un zimbello — ma uno schiaffo sonoro
che maddalena lasciò andare sulla guancia d’una tristerella più zanzara
delle altre, la quale un giorno le aveva detto: «tu.... puliscimi le
scarpe», levò a tutte la voglia di divertirsi, visto che le spese non
toccavano a lei, e la lasciarono sola.

si limitarono, a motivo della di lei taciturnità assoluta, a chiamarla
— fra loro, s’intende — la _dentistretti_. era tutto quello che il loro
odio poteva osare.... a rispettosa distanza.

così maddalena, della sua inferiorità s’era fatta uno sgabello di
superiorità, e le guardava tutte d’alto in basso.

tale posizione fattasi da sè stessa non contribuì certo a guadagnarle
i favori della signora direttrice, in coda alla quale venivano ostili
del pari, naturalmente, le maestre e i professori. unico il catechista
cessò d’esserle avverso, ma solo l’ultimo anno, quando maddalena,
benchè di bassa estrazione, aveva già qualche cosa di appetibile che le
altre non avevano.

di premj non gliene diedero mai uno. ed era forse quella che ne
meritava di più, perchè mostrava un ingegno pronto e vivace. sembrava
che per lei le difficoltà non esistessero. ma siccome le sue risposte
erano secche, buttate là senza grazia, non le fruttavano alcuna lode.
anzi, si diceva: «non è che un pappagallo.» come mai avrebbe potuto
essere morbida, graziosa, sapendosi a tutti in uggia, e avendo in uggia
tutti?

finalmente spuntò il giorno degli ultimi esami. maddalena, preso e
arrotolato senza molto riguardo il suo «attestato», uscì da quelle
aule senza salutare alcuno, e dicendo fra sè, all’indirizzo di tutti:
«speriamo di non incontrarci altro.»

aveva quattordici anni e mezzo, non aveva un’amica al mondo, non
sentiva alcun desiderio di trovarla, odiava le sue coetanee, non
aspirava a nulla, noncurante di tutto, sempre fredda — un’anima vuota.

i genitori avevano una mezza velleità di farle continuare gli studj,
onde avesse a riuscire una istitutrice buona per l’alta società, ma
siccome maddalena fece capire che non vi aveva alcuna disposizione:
«già — dissero — è meglio che diventi una brava donna di casa; maestre
ce n’è d’avanzo lo stesso.»

e per qualche tempo _parve_, infatti, fosse una di quelle fanciulle che
vengono cresciute in casa precisamente a prepararsi al matrimonio....
sul serio. attendere alla casa, cucire, ricamare: ecco la sua vita —
seguire la madre alla chiesa, ecco l’unica sua distrazione.

non pareva nemmeno accorgersi che vi fosse un mondo — e, come da
bambina, la sua più grande compiacenza stava nella solitudine e nella
meditazione. strana cosa, non leggeva — si sarebbe detto avesse un
mondo in sè, il quale assorbisse tutta la di lei attenzione, non
lasciandole pensiero d’altro, neppure della sua bellezza.... che non
poteva non vedere. — crediamo fosse ancora perfettamente innocente,
ossia ignorante, ma il suo cervello doveva lavorare.... perchè quando
veniva qualche uomo in casa, ella non cercava più la solitudine — e se
era nell’altra camera, ne usciva e stava a guardare quegli uomini.

in quei momenti ella era, per verità, tutta composta, il suo volto era
impassibile, non parlava, o rispondeva, a stento, puri monosillabi — ma
il di lei sguardo, benchè freddo, vitreo, era fisso, inquisitoriale.

ma chi si occupa dello sguardo d’una ragazza?

l’importante era che maddalena fosse una perfetta donna di casa —
e a diciassette anni la era, e la più raccomandabile per quanti la
conoscevano — quando in casa papetti, nella casa della pace, della
calma, del lavoro e della religione, avvenne una rivoluzione, che ebbe
gravissime conseguenze — non solo — ma provò anche come dove si vede
cenere, talvolta non v’è soltanto della cenere.

da qualche mese era avvenuto in maddalena un tal mutamento, che i suoi
genitori non avevano potuto a meno di avvedersene.

sul volto, per lo innanzi così sereno e fresco, erano comparse le prime
occhiaje, ed ogni giorno si facevano più fosche. tre rughe verticali,
tre solchi, che ogni dì s’approfondivano sempre più, erano venute
a deturpare la levigata fronte fra le sopracciglia. v’erano delle
stranezze nel suo contegno, e le nuove sue abitudini, proprio poco
belle per una fanciulla che aveva sempre vissuto con una regolarità
e una frugalità veramente esemplari, impensierivano molto i poveri
papetti.

v’eran dei giorni in cui non toccava cibo...., in altri, invece, veniva
presa da una voracità straordinaria.

essa, che aveva sempre mostrato ripugnanza per le bevande un grado più
spiritose dell’acqua, e, in genere, per i sapori forti, ora ricercava
avidamente vino, caffè tostato, liquori, agrumi.... e si fosse fermata
là!.... ma corrotto, eccitato alla frenesia il senso del gusto, ella
aveva ricorso al sale e a certe droghe, che dovevano bruciarle le
viscere e il sangue.

v’era poi il gran guajo che l’uso palese — già soverchio per una
giovinetta, e veniva molto biasimato, combattuto, impedito in tutti
i modi possibili dai genitori — era un’inezia in confronto dell’abuso
secreto di quelle sostanze corrosive o incendiarie.

v’erano giorni in cui si mostrava in preda ad una irrequietezza
irrefrenabile, e allora le sue pupille sfavillavano, dalle labbra
accese sgorgava la parola rapida, impetuosa, or stridente, or
squillante, e allora.... che vivacità di movimenti, che smania di
lavorare, di uscire, di correre....! — e ve n’erano altri che ella
passava sdrajata sur un’ottomana o girando per le stanze lentamente,
languida, accasciata come una convalescente, ed il suo occhio non aveva
che una luce smorta, immota, ed il labbro scolorato, aperto, pendente,
non dava nota. dimagrava a vista — le sue carni scottavano.... che
cos’aveva?

una persona sola avrebbe potuto dirlo, brigida, la fantesca — ma quella
non fiatò. anche senza il divieto di maddalena non avrebbe parlato;
temeva di compromettersi e di venir cacciata.

la madre interrogò la figlia con tutta quella cautela che le pareva
occorrere, ma senza alcun risultato. — «non ho nulla, sto benissimo.»
— «mi fai ridere.... che cosa devo avere?» — «no, neanche questo.»
— ecco le risposte di maddalena; ma siccome, nonostante le di lei
assicurazioni, il peggioramento continuava, si fece venire il medico,
il quale disse.... tutto quello che poteva e doveva dire, ossia che era
tempo di darle marito.

— come.... così giovine!? — esclamò caterina.

— mah! per certe donne è troppo presto a venti e per altre è già tardi
a quindici...; m’intendono?

— e dove andremo a pescarlo noi il marito, se non viene? — brontolavano
i papetti, udita tale ricetta, e da quel momento si fecero pensierosi e
tristi, fantasticando a due sul da farsi per riuscire a trovare questo
benedetto marito, che solo poteva spegnere il fuoco consumatore.

ma la cosa non era delle più facili.

nel mentre essi volevano con tutta l’anima la felicità della figlia,
avevano al solito le grandi pretensioni e tutte le paure delle piccole
borse. maddalena aveva nientemeno che diecimila lire di dote — messe
insieme soldo a soldo — dunque volevasi non un rompicollo, bensì un
galantuomo posato, con qualche cosa di suo.... se al sole, tanto meglio
— con un buon impiego e relativa pensione in prospettiva per la vedova.

e lì ufficiarono parenti e amici perchè avessero a battere la campagna,
oltre la città, a fin di scavare il suddetto galantuomo — ma ogni
ricerca fu vana.

— tanta roba si vuole per diecimila lire? — rispondevano le designate
supposte vittime — troppo onore!

— ma veda almeno la ragazza.... quando l’avrà veduta.... vedrà
che merita tutto. proprio la migliore delle figlie, piena di timor
di dio... non come tante altre, che.... una lavoratrice poi! e la
famiglia!! ma la fami........

— sì sì, tutto quello che si vuole, ma diecimila lire sono proprio
poche — e i parenti e gli amici tornavano mortificati come i bravi di
don rodrigo, ossia come segugi che, ecc., ecc., co’ musi bassi e con le
code ciondoloni.

ma se talvolta più si cerca e meno si trova, tal altra, quando meno ce
l’aspettiamo, la fortuna ci favorisce spontanea.

una bella sera, mentre il padre sventurato si trovava al solito
_cafferino_ a centellinare il non meno solito _agro caldo_ del vecchio
impiegato di tutti i tempi, un tale, di cui il dilettevole gioco del
dominò aveva procurato la conoscenza a papetti, venne fuori con delle
querimonie sull’esistenza di quell’uomo che è condannato a vivere senza
famiglia, solo come un cane, ecc., ecc.

come ben si può imaginare, il nostro genitore prese la palla al balzo e
disse subito:

— e perchè non prende moglie?

— eh! perchè sono vecchio!

— vecchio lei? ma so ben che mi scherza!

— sicuro che son vecchio.... sono vedovo ed ho quarant’anni....

— proprio la bella età per.... sicuro!

— ah! certo.... che.... non dico.... ma già le fanciulle voglion
qualche cosa di meglio.

il nostro impiegato, anzi _ex_, perchè da due anni circa era stato
giubilato con paga intera, il nostro ildebrando dunque lasciò cadere il
discorso.... ma era una furberia — e l’indomani sera comparve al caffè
un po’ più tardi dell’usato in compagnia di maddalena. era la prima
volta che egli conduceva colà sua figlia.

l’amico c’era.... e capisse o non capisse l’intenzione.... trovò la
ragazza di suo gusto, e lo disse al padre, che allora ricondusse più
volte maddalena. dopo qualche giorno di occhiate, di mezze parole,
di quarti di sospiri, la chiese in isposa, e ottenne un consenso
entusiastico dai genitori e il più secco e sarcastico dei no da
maddalena.

il povero aspirante mise la coda fra le gambe e fuggì come un cane
sorpreso da una doccia bollente, cambiò caffè, quartiere.... non lo si
vide più.

— ma come si fa a lasciarsi scappare un partito simile? — gridavano
tutto affannosi e lagrimosi i buoni papetti, colle mani giunte,
picchiandosi sulle ginocchia e gli occhi rivolti al cielo. — figurarsi,
il maggiordomo, l’uomo di confidenza del principe di moka che gli dava
tutto quel che voleva e anche quello che egli, il principe, non sapeva
di dargli. un uomo ancor fresco, ben conservato, vedovo sì, ma senza
figli, che aveva giù messo da parte, che continuava a metterne, e che
alla morte del principe.... chi sa!....

— non seccatemi altro! — interruppe a un tratto maddalena, la quale
aveva ascoltato fin là fredda, impassibile al solito, ma con un
aggrottamento di ciglia e un agitar di piedino che volevano certo
significar qualche cosa.

e levatasi, mosse con maestà da mima verso la sua camera.

era la prima volta che la figlia osava assumere un’aria rivoltosa e,
quel che è peggio, autocratica!

i genitori, il primo momento, percossi, ma tuttavia non credendo alle
proprie orecchie, corsero dietro la ribelle gridando:

— ma lena... figlia mia... cosa dici?

— niente! — ribattè seccò maddalena, facendo fronte-indietro sulla
soglia — dico soltanto che se non mi lasciate stare, io me ne
vado! —

ed entrata allora nella camera, vi si rinchiuse a chiave.

maddalena s’era rivelata improvvisamente quella che era.

i poveri papetti si guardarono raccapricciando, sbalorditi, poi
piansero, strillarono.... e poi.... e poi tacquero, si rassegnarono, e
da quel giorno furono gli umilissimi servi della figlia...., la quale
s’era fatta per sorpresa indipendente e signora, insegnando come si
fanno i colpi di stato.

e siccome tutto ciò è poco chiaro, andiamo a far un po’ di luce.




come certi negozj, che verso strada sembrano servir per un traffico e
poi nel retrobottega servono per.... tutt’altro — così vi sono delle
fanciulle, che apparentemente hanno una condotta irreprensibile,
proprio secondo tutte le regole adottate, e poi hanno un....
retro-bottega.

nel mentre, stando a quel che si vede, una di tali fanciulle conduce
un’esistenza monotona, insignificante, precisamente puerile — in
cui non trovate che innocenti sollazzi, confetti, fiori, in cui la
più grande emozione sembra quella d’una vestina nuova e di quattro
salti con accompagnamento di frittelle — ella ha, o, per meglio dire,
si procura, se lo vuole, se lo può appena, una.... retro-vita, la
quale, per poco che la fanciulla sia prudente, si sottrae a qualunque
sindacato.

non entreremo in particolari per ragioni facili ad indovinarsi ed anche
per non sembrar posseduti dalla smania di generalizzare. ci occuperemo
solo del caso speciale di maddalena, e ancora, non senza aver premesso
che, se i particolari appunto della retro-vita delle ragazze in
discorso fossero conosciuti o, se più vi garba, se si volesse farne
materia di studio, se ne trarrebbero delle deduzioni che influirebbero
a modificare di molto l’educazione della donna — per cui essa
crescerebbe più sinceramente ingenua, mentre l’ingenuità or non copre
che la così detta malizia, alla quale i bambini e gli sciocchi danno
tanta importanza — per cui essa sdegnerebbe mentire, mentre ora che vi
è forzata.... trova precisamente, in un apparato di menzogne, il mezzo
di far la sua volontà — beffandosi di tutti — per cui, infine, vivrebbe
più serena e tranquilla, mentre ora è in preda a malsane curiosità ed a
fantasticherie.... poco azzurre.... per non dir altro.

v’è una famosa scienza che vien ritenuta pericolosa, dannosa per
le ragazze — ma è pericolosa, dannosa, solo ora, perchè se ne fa un
mistero altissimo.

invece di costringere la donna a scoprirne da sè gli arcani....
insegnatele voi stessi quella scienza, con linguaggio aridamente
scientifico, all’aprirsi della sua mente, e vedrete che non le farà nè
freddo nè caldo.... precisamente come l’abbicì.

e allora forse non vi saranno più tante fantasie sregolate, sfrenate —
non vi saranno più tante morenti d’etisia. ma lasciamo le fanciulle in
generale e veniamo a maddalena.

la casa, o, per esser più esatti, il casamento in cui abitavano i
papetti, aveva due cortili.

il primo era piccolo ma civile, come si conveniva alla parte di
fabbricato prospiciente la via; il secondo, invece, si poteva quasi
chiamare una corte rustica. l’esservi una stalla e un pollajo gliene
davano, se non altro, l’odore, e il suolo ineguale e tutto mal
ciottolato, senza un pensiero al mondo dei poveri bipedi, che avrebbero
dovuto arrischiarvisi, diceva chiaro che si era pensato solo ai
quadrupedi.

nell’androne, che dal primo metteva nel secondo cortile, v’erano due
aperture, una a destra, l’altra a manca, che lasciavan veder le scale
al servizio della parte posteriore del casamento, il quale aveva anche
due ale.

l’ala sinistra, come il corpo, aveva tre piani oltre il terreno —
mentre la diritta era a un sol piano, che non si poteva dir terreno, ma
che era molto basso.

quell’ala doveva essere una qualche precauzione di un antico
proprietario, marito molto geloso de’ suoi diritti.

dal fabbricato si vedeva un gran giardino al di là del muro, che
correva fra le punte delle ale.

la scala a sinistra, che saliva a chiocciola, serviva la parte alta —
corpo e ala —; la scaletta a destra, di soli quindici gradini, saliva
diritta all’uscio dell’unico e microscopico appartamento che si trovava
nell’ala rispettiva.

i papetti abitavano nell’ala a sinistra, ma non più al terzo piano — da
qualche tempo, cominciando a pesar gli anni, eran discesi al secondo.

                                 * * *

un anno e mezzo circa prima che maddalena facesse quella bella scena
alla quale assistemmo, era venuta ad occupare l’appartamentino dell’ala
destra una donnina tutta sola...., ossia con una cameriera a doppio
uso.

era costei una sedicente vedova. poteva anche essere vedova realmente,
ma siccome il marito pareva essere sempre stato morto, così il
«sedicente» sta bene.

la mattina le avreste dato trentacinque anni — dopo le due pomeridiane
non più di trenta — e la sera anche venticinque. di notte, all’oscuro
poi.... ma questo non lo sappiamo.

era bellina, il che vuol dire anche bruttina — ma era simpatica.

una personcina delicata, che non porgeva esuberanze, ma non aveva
neanche deficienze — capelli neri, carnagione brunetta — e in tutta
lei, ma specialmente nello sguardo, modestamente provocante, e nel
sorriso misterioso continuo a fior di labbro.... un certo non so che,
per cui una donna sembra dir tacendo: «io so che ci sono, e quando
voglio, qualcuno se n’accorge.»

del resto, per la maldicenza non v’era niente da dire sul di lei
conto. riceveva pochissimo, nelle ore d’etichetta, e tutte persone
_comme-il-faut_. erano alcuni eleganti attempati.... _amici del
suo povero marito_, e alcune signore, che apparentemente dovevano
appartenere anche esse alla categoria delle vedove sedicenti e
seducenti.

tutta gente ben vestita, che andava e veniva senza far chiasso e senza
dar nell’occhio. una cosa sola si sarebbe potuto notare, ed è che delle
visite mascoline non era mai accaduto che una s’incontrasse da lei con
un’altra.... ma per notar questo, bisognava essere ben cattivi.

la sera ella non riceveva alcuno, tranne un giovinotto — ma era un suo
_fratello_.

tutto questo, che è pochissimo e insignificante, lo si sapeva dalla
portinaja, che lo teneva dalla domestica della vedova in discorso.

teneva anche che era buona buona ed aveva nome severina.

un freddurista dirà che è un bel nome per una signora.... e punto
scoraggiante per gli audaci. severa sì.... ma al diminutivo....
lasciatelo dire.

                                 * * *

nei primi cinque mesi la signora severina parve aliena dallo stringer
relazione con un inquilino. o amava la solitudine, o doveva aver delle
ragioni per conservarsi perfettamente libera, cosa difficile quando si
hanno delle conoscenze nella stessa casa in cui si abita. doveva anche
essere, a giudizio dei vicini, una donna tutta sacra alla memoria del
marito, perchè di carnevale non era uscita nemmeno una sera e perchè
nessuno sembrava gradirle, mentre si sapeva che v’erano dei signori....
ma proprio signori, i quali se ne occupavano moltissimo.

lettere non ne mancavano, la portinaja era stata importunata....
le lettere erano state consegnate — ma una faccia nuova in tutto
quel tempo non s’era ancor vista passare. si era ardito persino
di corrompere la cameriera, ma essa.... aveva accettato le mancie,
ridendo, e non solo non aveva mai riportato una risposta favorevole....
ma neanche una sfavorevole.

— sono matti tutti! — diceva la cameriera alla portinaja — la mia
signora non può pensare ad alcuno. —

i vicini, specialmente qualche giovinotto, incontrando severina, la
salutavano per tentar di ottenere un ricambio, che potesse servire di
primo gradino alla solita scala — ma fatica gettata — ella non vedeva
mai.

v’era tuttavia un’eccezione.

maddalena, che s’era imbattuta qualche volta in severina o nell’uscire
o nel rientrare, aveva veduto sul suo volto un dolcissimo sorriso di
simpatia, che era proprio tutto per lei maddalena — ma essa era sempre
seria e non aveva mostrato di accorgersi di quel sorriso. la sua
selvatichezza non era ancora stata vinta da alcuno.

un giorno però maddalena, dopo che severina le fu passata a
fianco, guardandola colla solita espressione, non potè a meno di
rivolgersi ad osservare quella elegantissima figurina, dalle movenze
vagamente ondulanti, la quale andava lasciando dietro sè un profumo
delicatissimo, strano, senza nome, così penetrante, che pareva scendere
al cuore.

tale almeno fu l’effetto che produsse in maddalena, per la quale era
una novità. per la prima volta ella si era soffermata pensando a quella
signora, e aperte le labbra aspirò l’aria tutta odorante per esalarla
quindi in un sospiro.

si sarebbe detto che v’era magìa.

maddalena, che non aveva mai desiderato un’amica, da quel momento
sentissi attratta verso severina....; e il miracolo era stato fatto da
un semplice profumo!

maddalena non avrebbe potuto dirne allora la ragione — ma la ragione vi
era. ella sdorava già la pubertà.... e quel profumo, penetrando in lei,
vi aveva vellicato per la prima volta il recondito senso della voluttà.

salita, ritiratasi nella sua camera, aperse la finestra, e appoggiatasi
col fianco al parapetto, là stette tutta mesta guardando quel cortile,
quel giardino, quelle mura.... tutto era deserto, tutte le finestre
chiuse, lo spazio era inondato da una luce pallida e fredda; non
giungeva altro romore che quello lontano alternato di un martellar di
scalpelli nella via.

per la prima volta, guardatasi attorno, sentì uggiosa, pesante quella
solitudine, che ella stessa aveva pur voluta fino a quel giorno — per
la prima volta sentì un bisogno di respirare a pieni polmoni, e una
forza nuovissima trascinarla al romore, alla folla, al mondo, alla vita
— per la prima volta le venne in mente di mirarsi nello specchio....
ma, corsavi, fece una smorfia, perchè si vide pallida e quasi brutta. —
però, fermatasi alquanto, toccati i capelli, aperto un tantino l’abito,
lì sotto il mento, fatto il confronto fra sè e severina, provandosi
a sorridere, finì a sorridere davvero. aveva trovato che se anche
severina fosse stata mal pettinata e peggio vestita come lei, sarebbe
stata forse più brutta di lei.... quindi passando al viceversa....
sperò poterla superare. ma come fare, con chi consigliarsi, ella che
non conosceva alcuno? dire ai genitori: — d’or innanzi, voglio farmi
bella, divertirmi, vivere — le pareva una enormità.

a chi ricorrere dunque per ajuto a fine di raggiungere il suo scopo
per altra via? un mezzo solo v’era, fare la conoscenza di severina,
che certo doveva essere una maestra eccellente, e l’avrebbe istrutta
in tutto, e fors’anche avviata nel principio di quel labirinto
intricatissimo che le pareva, ed è infatti, la vita.

ma come riuscire a far la relazione di severina? offrirsi? pregare?
questo ripugnava al di lei orgoglio.... tanto più che fra le
possibilità v’era anche quella di un rifiuto.

non restava che attendere dal caso una occasione favorevole per
avvicinare la signora e afferrare tale occasione.

ma per quanto maddalena spiasse, l’occasione non si presentava.
severina restava invisibile, pareva non uscisse più. la fanciulla
si cuoceva d’impazienza, e casa sua le diveniva ogni giorno più
antipatica. ma finalmente quel benedetto tempo, che se, tutto toglie,
apporta anche tutto, permise alle sue speranze di rianimarsi.

spuntato aprile, le vetriata dall’appartamento di severina si schiusero
ai soavi zeffiri, alla gaja luce della primavera — e la desiderata
signora cominciò a far delle apparizioni sul suo terrazzino.

maddalena allora cominciò dal canto suo, a passare, lavorando, alla
finestra tutto il tempo di cui poteva disporre.

non occorre dire che ogni qual volta severina si lasciava vedere,
maddalena smetteva di lavorare e si sporgeva fuor della finestra per
attirare la di lei attenzione.... ma questo pareva difficile.

tuttavia, or col tossire, or col cantare, or col muovere la sedia
o il tavolino.... fece tanto che un giorno severina alzò gli occhi
al secondo piano, e siccome la fanciulla scorse sul di lei volto il
medesimo dolce sorriso, così sorrise anch’essa subito, chinando il
capo.

da quel dì severina prese l’abitudine di guardar, al secondo piano,
quella ragazza, che lavorava sempre, e il di lei viso esprimeva, oltre
che simpatia, compassione. si salutavano sempre, tuttavia per qualche
settimana le cose non progredirono.

ma poi una specie d’occasione non tardò a presentarsi, e maddalena non
se la lasciò sfuggire.

affacciandosi alla finestra, vide una novità sul terrazzino della
signora.

un giardiniere vi stava disponendo con arte del vasi di fiori, che due
facchini scaricavano nel cortile da un carro e portavano su.

erano fiori delle specie più vaghe e più fragranti.

maddalena, anche per l’attrazione simpatica che v’è sempre fra la
giovinezza e i fiori, ma, innanzi altro, per tentare severina, si mise
a batter le mani in atto di gioja e maraviglia, cosicchè la signora
levò lo sguardo e sorrise a maddalena, la quale le fece un bell’inchino
sporgendosi tutta come se volesse osservare più da vicino, odorare
quasi l’olezzante famiglia.

severina, o indovinasse finalmente il desìo che cuoceva la fanciulla —
o avendo ella stessa la medesima brama, vedesse opportuno il momento
per iniziare conoscenza meno superficiale — il fatto è che, spiccata
una bella rosa, la offrì, col gesto, a maddalena.

quella arrossì di piacere, e rispose con altro gesto che voleva dire:
«gradisco ma non so come pigliarla.»

allora severina non esitò più e le fe’ cenno che andasse da lei.

maddalena non se lo fece ripetere, e detto alla madre, per aver
un pretesto di scendere: — vado a prender un po’ d’acqua, — giù a
precipizio per la scala, su per quell’altra, da severina.

la signora l’attendeva sull’uscio e raccolse con un: «brava!» e con un
bel bacio in fronte.

                                 * * *

— ma, maddalena.... dove sei? — fe’ caterina alla finestra, cinque
minuti dopo, non vedendo tornar la figlia.

— sono qui! — rispose maddalena comparendo sul terrazzino, unita a
severina, che con un braccio le cingeva il fianco.

— permette? — disse severina alla madre della fanciulla.

— ah! ma guarda.... guarda un po’ quella sfacciatella....! — esclamò
caterina tutta sorpresa, ma non senza piacere.

— non la sgridi, la prego — continuò la signora — sono stata io....

— ah! non dico.... anzi.... obbligata.... ma doveva chiedermi il
permesso....

— me la lascia un momento ancora?

— ella è ben buona, sa!... se non è capace di dir due parole in croce!
basta.... faccia lei!

— grazie. —

maddalena rientrò in casa, mezz’ora dopo, tutta infiorata e con una
sacchettina che «la signora le aveva data espressamente per la mamma.»

quando caterina sentì queste parole, le vennero le lagrime, e a
maddalena, che, dopo averle cantate le lodi della signora, le domandò
se l’avrebbe lasciata ancora andare da lei, rispose tutta felice:

— ma sì.... va.... è una signora come si deve, e non ti può che far
bene. —

come sono mai certi genitori e specialmente certe madri...., purchè i
loro figli ricevano gentilezze in una casa, non badano più che tanto
se convenga, poi, sotto _tutti_ i rapporti, lasciarli andare in quella
casa. e su questo proposito, senza che aggiungiamo altro noi, quelli e
quelle che non sono più ragazzi, informino.

se il primo giorno maddalena si fermò mezz’ora dà severina — il secondo
vi passò un’ora, il terzo una mezza di più.... e ben presto la durata
media delle sue visite fu di due ore.

l’effetto di quelle visite fu tale — in maddalena avvenne in breve
tempo una trasformazione così grande, che i papetti ne furono
maravigliatissimi.

come.... la loro lena, che pareva esser nata selvaggia.... in pochi
giorni s’era civilizzata (_sic_)? — come, quella lena, che non parlava
mai ed aveva un contegno da monaca.... si degnava d’esser gaja, si
degnava di conversare affabilmente coi propri genitori? — quella lena,
che fin allora s’era sempre pettinata come una vecchia beghina, i
capelli scendenti a guisa di cortina, tanto da nascondere per metà le
sopracciglia, che parevano incollati sulle tempie e sapevan di sego,
ora non si presentava che acconciata con leggiadrìa, emanando un olezzo
gratissimo esotico? — quella lena, infine, che aveva sempre portato
l’abito meschino d’una.... _stellina_, nè mai pareva aver pensato a
mutar foggia e stoffa, ora si abbigliava, studiava il figurino della
moda, ne seguiva i consigli?

davvero che la metamorfosi era sorprendente — e i papetti ne
gongolavano e appagavano, incoraggiavano anzi le fantasie, per quanto
costose, di maddalena, che la rendevano bella, bella come essi non
avevano mai supposto potesse divenire — stella fulgente!... diceva
papà — pensando che in tal modo le sarebbe più facile di destare il
capriccio in qualche gran signore, che, s’intende, la sposerebbe.

e a quelli che si maravigliavano, a ragione, di tanta e improvvisa
novità, dicevano:

— prima andava bene come andava, perchè le ragazze devono venir su
modeste, senza tante idee inutili — ora è giunto il suo tempo....
faccia anche lei quello che richiede la sua età.... la sua posizione.

secondo il loro convincimento, maddalena aveva una _posizione_!




se il trovarsi in certi ambienti è sempre pericoloso per qualsiasi età,
è perniciosissimo, indubbiamente, per un’età giovanissima.

apprendendo la scienza della vita a grado a grado, non si muterà
natura, se la natura ha certe propensioni decise, ma si potrà imparare
ad evitare la sfrenatezza siccome anti-igienica e nociva nell’opinione
pubblica; si potrà imparare a conservare la _forma_, non foss’altro,
per rispetto di sè stessi.... — parliamo di chi ci tiene al rispetto
di sè stessi. — ma apprendendo tutto in un sol colpo, a sedici anni,
si corre un gran rischio di perdere la testa — o, per lo meno, di
guastarsela in modo che, dopo, la è questione semplicemente d’occasione
— per cominciare — e in seguito si fa della vita un’occasione sola.

sedici anni.... proprio l’epoca climaterica, in cui il sangue
ricchissimo comincia a far sentire la sua possanza scagliandosi a
ondate sul cuore o sul cervello — in cui il sistema nervoso comincia
a tiranneggiare il corpo, a ridersi dei nostri principj, della nostra
educazione, se abbiamo ricevuto quella che si chiama buona, e a
uccidere quella volontà che dovrebbe essere il frutto delle nostre
convinzioni, facendone sorgere altra.... certamente più naturale, ma
forse poco parente della signora morale, che conoscerete probabilmente
come la conoscono i moralisti.... di vista.

non sappiamo se il lettore alle parole: _certi ambienti_ avrà detto:
«non capisco.» si ricordi del come gli abbiamo presentato severina. se
non ha capito primo, capisce adesso? — no. — bravo; allora vada avanti
e capirà.

l’appartamentino di severina si sarebbe potuto definire il nido della
voluttà — perchè tutto, dalle combinazioni dei colori delle tappezzerie
e delle cortine, dalla morbidezza delle stoffe alla varia luce che
in un certo gabinetto non pareva più luce, al profumo indefinibile e
snervante — quel tal profumo — che impregnava l’atmosfera, dalle caste
arditezze dei quadri mitologici agli intrecciamenti e alle contorsioni
spasmodiche di bronzi rivali o copie dell’arte antica.... tutto era
blandizie pei sensi. e all’anima sembrava che da ogni mobile, da ogni
tela, da ogni bronzo uscisse una voce sommessa, insinuante, misteriosa,
che diceva....: ama. —

non si poteva restar seduti impunemente in quella penombra....; era
una malìa; la ragione s’oscurava, gli occhi si chiudevano.... era
necessario balzar in piedi, fuggire.

ma si potevo volere? — si voleva potere? il sorriso di severina sarebbe
qui una buona risposta.

                                 * * *

noi siamo figli dei nostri padri e delle nostre madri — pare
impossibile, non è vero? — e talora in fatto di padri.... abbiamo
del lusso — ma realmente noi siamo figli di chi sa impadronirsi e
dirigere l’anima nostra. qualche volta siamo figli di nostro padre o
di nostra madre e anche d’ambedue, quando essi, avendo la coscienza
e l’amore della loro missione, s’impadroniscono appunto dell’anima
nostra, e, gelosissimi del loro potere, non permettono mai ad alcuno di
condividerlo — e allora, o bene o male, riesciamo moralmente l’imagine
o dell’autore o dell’autrice o quella fusa d’entrambi ripetuta. ma
è raro, perchè, generalmente, tenerezza per la missione educatrice —
che comincia un po’ prima e va un po’ più in là del mandare a scuola —
non c’è strabbondanza. — e allora riesciamo figli o della cameriera o
del vicino di casa, o del primo amico o di qualche prete — e se non di
qualcuno fra questa gente, certo del primo o della prima amante.

avviene anche a certi individui privilegiati, i quali si trovano
moralmente abbandonati, o quasi, a sè stessi; che, senza saperlo, si
sottraggono a qualunque influenza.... e riescono invece figli del loro
tempo. se in quel tempo poi v’è crisi nelle idee del secolo, possono
riescire persino uomini di spirito — ma se non c’è crisi, non possono
diventare che uomini spiritosi.

quando le idee nuove danno battaglia campale alle idee vecchie, chi si
batte pel trionfo delle prime è un uomo di spirito.

quando battaglia, per lo meno visibile, non c’è; ma si sa beffarsi
delle idee correnti, che si riconoscono false e ridicole, si è uomini
spiritosi.

chi è figlio solo di suo padre e di sua madre non sarà mai un uomo
di spirito e neppure un uomo spiritoso, perchè i padri e le madri, in
genere, amano fabbricare dei.... cretini.

in questo, per essi, sta la vera propagazione della razza umana e....
per dio!... le scuole li secondano bene e compiono l’opra.

                                 * * *

siccome ildebrando e caterina non avevano saputo veder altro in
maddalena che una macchinetta di carne, cui basta impinzare di
cibo, coprire e mandare a scuola — e non avevano mai pur sospettato
la possibilità, il dovere di una cura dell’anima; così avvenne che
maddalena dovette riescir figlia di severina, la quale non vi mise, del
resto, alcun proposito di corruzione.

a lei bastò d’essere severina.

per la mancanza d’altri principj e di esperienza da opporre a quella
scuola, per la sua natura e per l’età, maddalena era già terreno ben
preparato per certa coltivazione. — restava solo da lasciarvi cadere la
semente.

fin dal primo giorno severina aveva parlato a maddalena come si parla
ad una donna già donna — con una perfetta indifferenza di soggetti,
come si discorre della pioggia e del bel tempo. dai particolari della
_toilette_ a quelli della più intima igiene — capitolo speciale — dai
commenti liberissimi sui fatti diversi riportati dai giornali alle
discussioni sulle passioni descritte nei romanzi, aggiunte le chiose
sulle situazioni più.... interessanti — tutto aveva il colorito d’una
realtà così semplice che maddalena non poteva a meno di sorridere,
prendendovi un piacere infinito. ella si diceva che sino a quel tempo
era stata così chiusa in sè stessa, solo forse perchè non aveva mai
sentito parlare. quello di severina soltanto le pareva un parlare.

da severina seppe che il cuore d’una donna è un valore nominale
inutile, spesso dannoso a lei — che il valore reale corrente, e il solo
quindi che le dà valore e le torna utile, è la sua _toilette_.

una bella donna con un bel cuore, ma senza una bella _toilette_, è
nulla in confronto d’una donna anche bruttina ma molto elegante.

da severina seppe che gli uomini, in genere, colle donne, o fanno il
tiranno o fanno l’imbecille. fanno il tiranno con quelle poverine tutto
cuore, senza fiele, che, cresciute per il sacramento, non conoscono
che la sommissione, il lavoro e la rassegnazione — fanno l’imbecille
colle furbe, che hanno il talento della pelatura, amano l’ozio, la vita
gaudente.... e mettono alla porta chi vien fuori di tempo, solo perchè
ne ha il diritto.... o, per lo meno, crede d’averlo.

da severina seppe che gli uomini, sempre in genere, cercano nella
donna un talento solo: _l’arte di_.... — scusate, ma non ricordiamo la
parola.

a farla breve, in poco tempo maddalena ricevette tante lezioni da
potersi dir maestra.... se non altro, in teoria. le mancava la pratica,
ma sulle prime pareva non curarsene.

anzi affettava un tal disprezzo per l’uomo, che, alla sua età, faceva
ridere. mentre le altre fanciulle, a seconda del grado maggiore o
minore di modestia o di ipocrisia, sol che vedano un uomo simpatico,
gli piantano in faccia due avidi occhi o gli lasciano andare, così di
traverso, quella timida occhiatina che dice tante cose; maddalena non
si degnava di guardar alcuno, qualunque fosse l’eleganza o la bellezza
di chi passava. li vedeva, s’intende, ma il suo sguardo sembrava fisso,
diritto, sur un punto invisibile, che non aveva nulla d’umano.

e come andava! marciava.

impettita, la bocca sdegnosa, con passo fiero, piuttosto lungo, sempre
eguale, non curante i miseri mortali che incontrava, lasciando cader
solo uno: _stupido!_ se alcuno, per caso, abbagliato dalla di lei
bellezza, osava fermarsi, susurrando una frase d’ammirazione.

ah! sì, maddalena s’era veramente fatta bellissima in pochi mesi,
dacchè aveva apprese e praticate tutte le arti, diremo così, cosmetiche
di severina, non esclusa quella tanto vantaggiosa per la bellezza,
che consiste nel dare ad una buona mensa la debita importanza. e il
risultato si vedeva. tutto quello che doveva spiccare.... spiccava —
e il suo catechista, se l’avesse riveduta allora, con quanto fervore
avrebbe esclamato: _oh! virgo potens! — oh! causa nostræ letitiæ! — oh!
vas insigne devotionis! — janua cœli!_

                                 * * *

un giorno severina, la quale aveva notato la specie di sprezzo di cui
maddalena sembrava onorare gli uomini, sprezzo che faceva contrasto con
tutte le varie curiosità onde la giovinetta era presa — le disse:

— non sprezzar tanto, mia cara.... non crederti superiore alle altre
donne, perchè tu pure, come le altre donne, hai un cuore, e sei di
carne. sta certa che verrà anche per te il momento di perdere la testa.

— oh! io non m’innamorerò mai.

— perchè?....

— perchè non posso desiderare alcun uomo, se il mondo è come lo dipingi
tu.... prima di conoscerti, alle volte fantasticavo.... ti dico la
verità.... è tanto naturale.... — ma ora che, grazie a te, so cosa è il
mondo....

— che bambina!.... e se trovassi un’eccezione fra questi uomini?

— un’eccezione?

— un uomo può essere il più sciocco o il più malvagio degli uomini....
ma quando una donna lo trova bello.... egli diventa il migliore degli
uomini. le donne credono di amare un uomo per le sue qualità.... come,
del resto, anche gli uomini credono di amare una donna per i suoi
pregi morali. non è vero. si ama quell’uomo o quella donna perchè i
suoi lineamenti, e spesso anche solo le altre sue forme, rispondono
a quel sentimento del bello che è in noi, e vive ed è in continua
agitazione, senza che noi vi riflettiamo, ricercando avidamente delle
soddisfazioni. un artista mi diceva che è il sentimento estetico.... io
non lo credo. quando penso a quello che sento io, credo invece sia il
sentimento del sesso.... infatti, incontrando una bella donna, io dico
solo: «ecco una bella donna» — è la sensazione purissima dell’occhio
che vede un complesso armonico di linee.... ma quando io incontro un
bell’uomo, ossia quell’uomo che, secondo la mia natura, è bello, io
sento una commozione, alla quale ti giuro che l’accademia delle belle
arti è affatto estranea.

— tu senti una commozione? dammene una idea....

— non posso.... non capiresti. la stessa tua domanda mi mostra lo stato
dell’anima tua. essa desidera, essa attende.... ma egli non viene. tu
non sai chi egli sia, nè dove possa trovarsi. forse verrà domani....
forse fra un anno.... fra dieci.... venti.... forse non verrà mai.

— ah! non dirlo....

— vedi.... come ti sei tradita! il tuo disprezzo per gli uomini è il
disprezzo di certi giovinetti per le donne. non potendo ancora sentire,
non possono comprendere quello che sentono gli altri, e per ciò solo
credonsi invulnerabili e compassionano o deridono chi cade. ma viene
anche per essi il giorno terribile.... e se non viene.... tanto peggio!
allora, che vita miserabile! — dunque ora siamo intese, e quando verrà,
dimmelo.

— io lo cerco nella folla e non lo trovo.

— è un errore il cercare. alla tua età si ha un ideale che non si
saprebbe forse nemmeno dire come sia fatto.... è un po’ di tutti....
e non è niente di nessuno.... è.... è.... quando verrà, tu dirai:
«eccolo.... è lui!» — e ti parrà d’averlo sempre conosciuto. —

severina aveva ragione, e maddalena desiderava ardentemente di poter
esclamare qualche giorno, magari presto.... «eccolo, è lui!» — ma non
sperava molto. intanto continuava a marciare sprezzante: dicendo fra
sè: «possibile che fra tanta gente non vi sia quello che voglio io?»

erano le quattro di sera di una tiepida giornata di novembre, e le
nostre amiche uscivano dalla cancellata dei giardini, quando severina
sentendo sul suo una leggiera pressione del braccio di maddalena,
domandò:

— che cosa c’è?

— è strana! sai che quasi quasi direi.... — maddalena non potè
finire. un giovine signore, incontrandole in quel punto, s’era fermato
salutando rispettosamente la fanciulla e prendendo la mano di severina.

— la signora maddalena mia vicina ed amica — fe’ severina, presentando
— mio fratello.... —

il fratello disse poche parole, poi risalutò e si allontanò.

a maddalena erano parse insignificanti le frasi che severina e quel
signore avevano scambiate. severina non vide che quel signore aveva
guardato più volte a lungo negli occhi di maddalena — nè che questa
aveva sopportate con sufficiente fermezza quelle occhiate, e aveva
sorriso all’ultima che egli, staccandosi, avevale lanciata.

— ti piace mio fratello? — fe’ scherzando severina, non appena fu sola
coll’amica.

— visto che è tuo fratello, ti dirò che mi piace! — rispose maddalena,
ridendo.

severina non seppe resistere, e ne disse tutto il bene che ne pensava —
e non era poco.

— non l’ho mai veduto da te.... — notò maddalena.

— non viene quasi mai.... e quelle poche volte che viene.... è di sera.

— ah! —

qui dobbiamo avvertire che se pareva esistere, ed esisteva anche,
grande intimità fra le due amiche, v’era però una specie di
regolamento.... di etichetta, diremo, che severina non aveva imposto,
ma che la finezza di maddalena aveva compreso sin dal principio,
regolamento ch’ella si sarebbe ben guardata dall’infrangere, e
l’osservanza del quale ella capiva essere forse la condizione
principale della loro amicizia. l’una aveva saputo farsi intendere,
parlando sulle generali — e l’altra aveva inteso bene.

ella sapeva che severina riceveva solo in certe ore — e in quelle ore
non aveva mai trovato nessuno da lei. sapeva che severina non voleva
far visita ad alcuno per non riceverne. — aveva fatto un’eccezione per
lei, maddalena — e basta.

in questo, severina era stata molto morale — o molto prudente, per
ragioni d’interesse tutto suo?

sul punto di lasciarsi, quello stesso giorno, severina, ricordando
certe parole di maddalena, domandò:

— e che cosa volevi poi dire, poco fa?

— quando?

— ma sì.... quando hai esclamato, mi pare: «è strana.... quasi quasi
direi....»

— ah! aspetta.... — fe’ maddalena con sforzo per raccapezzare.... —
ma.... non mi ricordo proprio più.

— bè! me lo dirai un’altra volta. addio. —

maddalena aveva mentito. se ne ricordava benissimo — ma se prima
avrebbe parlato e volentieri, ora non voleva più parlare. forse col
tempo, se....

gli è che, prima, avendolo per un ignoto qualunque che passava ignoto a
lei e alla compagna, coll’esclamare: _eccolo, è lui!_ non avrebbe fatto
che esprimere un’impressione nuovissima per lei — egli sarebbe tosto
scomparso per sempre e l’impressione si sarebbe cancellata, lasciando
tutt’al più un lieve rammarico di brevissima durata.... — ma ora, come
esprimere quell’impressione alla sorella di suo fratello?

e se severina parlasse? e se il fratello dicesse per caso, ridendo,
d’aver pensato in veder lei, maddalena, per la prima volta: _eccola,
non è lei!_ — quale disfatta pel suo amor proprio, quale punizione del
dispregio ch’ella aveva sin allora affettato per gli altri uomini!

il primo da lei desiderato, che.... la rifiutava!

— no, no, tacere e attendere. nello stesso modo che con un po’ di
pazienza — si diceva — sono riescita a conoscere severina — con un
altro poco riescirò a conoscere suo fratello.... e ciò non mancherà, se
l’impressione che io ho prodotta in lui è simile a quella ch’egli ha
prodotto in me.... dovrà essere precisamente lui quello a cui io sarò
indifferente, quando tutti si fermano quasi estatici a mirarmi al mio
passare? —

guardossi nello specchio, provò il sorriso col quale lo avrebbe
salutato, incontrandolo la seconda volta — e allora sperò.

la notte tuttavia non fu senz’ansie.

quando avrebbe potuto rivederlo? e che sarebbe avvenuto poi?.... e....
e.... tutti quegli e che crea il sogno nella veglia, in cui si scorge
da lungi una realtà possibile e si hanno ancora tutte le incertezze,
per non dire i timori che non si tratti appunto che d’un sogno.

                                 * * *

l’impressione poteva essere effimera, poteva aver fatto nascere un puro
capriccio, ma era stata forte da ambe le parti. chi poteva muoversi —
l’uomo — cercò tosto chi non poteva muoversi, la donna, alla quale, per
molte ragioni, non era permesso far un sol passo per cercare.

ecco, come, l’indomani mattina, maddalena uscendo con brigida, la
domestica, per la provvista giornaliera, s’imbattè nel giovine signore.
— ma l’incontro fu per lei così improvviso, ch’essa non ebbe tempo
neppur di pensare a fargli quel tal sorriso studiato il giorno prima.
scossa, confusa, chinò il volto tutto di bragia e passò. e fu il
miglior saluto.

si rividero così una, due, quattro mattine di seguito.... ma, preparata
allora, ella potè rispondere al di lui saluto con una grazia e con un
sorriso, che dovevano scompigliare quel favorito fra i mortali.

maddalena, dopo aver incontrato tre volte il giovine signore,
s’aspettava che, da un momento all’altro, severina avesse a dirle:
— sai, mio fratello ti ama e mi ha incaricata di esaminare il tuo
cuore. — ma vedendo che severina non solo non toccava quel tasto, ma
non si lasciava sfuggire alcuna allusione, per quanto lontana, ad
una possibilità di simpatia fra i due giovani — il quarto dì perdè
la pazienza e volle esplorare il terreno. come un bravo esploratore,
cominciò tuttavia molto guardinga — tanto temeva ancora:

— questa mattina ho incontrato tuo fratello.

— ah! sì? — fe’ severina con indifferenza.

— è la quarta volta che lo incontro....

— come!? da quando? — esclamò severina, che non potè frenare un moto di
sorpresa, e nel cui sguardo maddalena vide con stupore qualche cosa di
feroce che la colpì e la rese ancor più cauta.

— almeno mi pare che sia lui, tuttavia posso ingannarmi.... — poi, dopo
un momento di silenzio: — ha moglie tuo fratello?

— non l’ha e non la prende! — disse seccamente severina lanciandole una
occhiata sospettosa e scrutatrice.

— fa bene! — fu pronta a dir bravamente alto maddalena, continuando
poscia fra sè: «ho capito. egli sarà ricco e si avrà paura che sposi
una ragazza povera o quasi. prudenza allora, e lavoriamo sotto acqua.
chi sa che un giorno io non venga a dirti: severina, gioisci con me;
tuo fratello mi sposa. — se ciò avverrà, come io farò di tutto perchè
avvenga, t’assicuro che te l’annuncerò con tutto il giubilo che si deve
avere quando si finge dar per lietissima una notizia che si sa dover
tornar molto dolorosa.»

— io farò di tutto perchè avvenga — aveva detto maddalena, e cominciò
subito l’indomani a far qualche cosa, col dare al suo sguardo
un’espressione che era un invito.

brigida aveva ricevuto inoltre delle istruzioni — e quando il giovine
signore si avvicinò, la fantesca scomparve nella bottega del droghiere.

questo gioco, ripetuto il giorno successivo, fece capire al giovine che
non si trattava di caso e ch’egli poteva ardire. onde ardì subito.

all’incontrar la giovinetta sola, vedendone lo sguardo più che mai
incoraggiante, si fermò, e salutandola come si saluta una duchessa:

— buon giorno, signorina.... vorrebbe lasciarsi salutare!

— troppo gentile — (pausa, in cui si guardavano sorridenti, egli
incerto, ella provocando tutto) poi: — va da sua sorella? —

il giovine non potè a meno d’arrossire, e balbettò:

— da....? ah! sicuro.... da mia sorella.... a proposito, non ho mai
avuto il piacere di incontrarla da severina.

— non vado mai da lei la sera.

— ed ella sa che io vi vado di sera?

— sì, me l’ha detto sua sorella.

— allora v’andrò di giorno.

— non glielo consiglio.... non credo che sua sorella sentirebbe un gran
piacere se ci vedesse incontrarci.

— come fa a saperlo?

— l’ho capito.

— ed ella è indifferente a questo?

— a.... cosa?

— alla contrarietà che severina mostrerebbe, secondo lei, se sapesse
che ci siamo riveduti....

— ma.... — e fingeva incertezza guardando il suolo.

— dica pure....

— non.... so.... — e continuava il gioco.

— allora glielo dirò in altro modo. se mia sorella fosse contenta che
io la incontrassi.... ella cosa ne penserebbe?

— non.... so.... — ma stavolta lo sguardo si levò timidamente, amoroso,
sul volto del giovine, quasi a supplicarlo di non crederle.

— pensandovi qualche tempo.... potrebbe riescire a saperlo?

— e.... poi? — ella si guardava d’intorno quasi smarrita.

— e poi.... vedremo. intanto non dica niente — se crede — del nostro
incontro a severina. la mia famiglia ha una gran paura che io pensi a
maritarmi.... gliene dirò poi le ragioni. del resto, io sono padrone di
me stesso.... ma forse, per una prima volta, ho già abusato della sua
bontà.... se è così.... creda.... glielo dico sinceramente.... creda
che io bramo solo di abusarne al massimo grado. —

e con questo scherzo, ridendo, si lasciarono.

si rividero.... si parlarono..., molto si parlarono, per ripetersi che
si amavano.

vediamo un po’ addentro in questo amore.... vi sono tante specie
d’amore!

non v’è forse anche l’amore senz’amore?




chi era, innanzi tutto, il giovine signore, per il quale maddalena
aveva provato i primi palpiti?

vi sono dei giovinotti che fanno la bella vita, ossia odiano ogni
lavoro, vestono bene, mangiano meglio, si vedono dappertutto dove
c’è qualche cosa da godere, che sulle labbra hanno sempre il sorriso
dell’uomo felice, fra le labbra uno zigaro di contrabbando, cui non
mancano mai venticinque centesimi per il _vermouth_ o per l’_absinthe_
— e che non hanno rendite accertate. per lo meno, nessuno le conosce.

infatti, sostanza propria non ne hanno mai avuto, meno qualcuno che ha,
o si dice abbia consumato, qualche migliajo di lire slanciandosi nel
mondo.

sia come si vuole, la loro fortuna è ora composta soltanto di debiti,
ma a guisa dei grandi stati, a cui essi commettono la spiritosità di
paragonarsi, tali debiti sono per essi una fonte di credito.

la loro ricetta per pagare i debiti è la solita: i vecchi non pagarli.
— i nuovi farli diventar vecchi.

hanno delle amanti di tutti i generi, specialmente del peggiore....
che non è il meno abbondante — e nel numero si trovano anche delle
donnine a modo, la cui onestà ha avuto un istante di.... sonnolenza,
come si trovano delle donne che non aspettano più i cinquanta, ma che
li hanno dimenticati. la vecchiaja deve pur esser consolata, se si vuol
guadagnare.... il cielo.

non sono precisamente lenoni o cinedi, o mantenuti o buffoni.... nel
senso medioevale.... sono un _consommé_ di tutto questo.

anche la parola _parassiti_ è un po’ troppo bassa per qualificarli....
perchè sono piuttosto _invitati_ che mendicanti. diremo: son gente
che _san fare_! san fare colle donne, le quali hanno sempre un
estremo bisogno di ridere, e talvolta — _en petit comité_ — anche di
sghignazzare.

san fare cogli amici ricchi — non apprezzano che la società degli amici
possidenti.... molto possidenti — i quali, annojati o sciocchi, hanno
bisogno assoluto e continuo di qualche bello spirito che li distragga,
si lasci burlare, li burli, li presenti ad una ballerina o ad una....
signora, e partecipi ai loro olimpici sacrifizj notturni.

i meno abili, al tempo del bagni e delle villeggiature, restano in
città — i più abili partono e non di rado tornano in fondi.

non hanno ricevuto quel che si dice una educazione — ma sul bigliardo,
al tavolo da gioco, in stalla e nei gabinetti di venere hanno imparato
tanto, che più di una celebrità scientifica o letteraria, appetto di
loro, farebbe la figura di un imbecille o d’un uomo dell’altro mondo.

non pochi sarebbero imbrogliati a scrivere una lettera al sarto.... ma
è certo che a una prima rappresentazione d’un’opera, d’una commedia
o d’un ballo, la loro sentenza è irrevocabile. per il ballo, vada; è
questione di piedi.

questo è quello che si vede di tal sorta di gente, dai diciotto ai
trentacinque anni circa. dopo, chi muore logorato dagli eccessi — chi
s’imbarca sul mar conjugale con una invidiabile indifferenza per le
avarìe che la nave ha già sofferte.... e potrà soffrire in seguito
— chi vivacchia il più onestamente.... che può, sul gioco — chi si
fa mentore di qualche rampollo, per sorreggerlo nei primi passi sul
sentiero.... della gloria e della virtù — chi si fa.... sensale di
connubj più o meno legali — e chi va in galera.... o meriterebbe
d’andarvi.

i più onesti, i più indipendenti diventano letterati, ossia scrivono
tutti i giorni una lettera a qualche vecchio amico — a qualche noto
negoziante — nelle quali lettere si è sicuri di trovar sempre le
seguenti parole: _caduto assoluta miseria — supplico filantropia
— qualunque tenue elemosina — eterna riconoscenza — lasci risposta
portinajo_.

                                 * * *

giulio bindi non era ancor uno di quegli individui di cui ci siamo or
ora occupati, ma aveva tutte le buone disposizioni e batteva proprio la
via giusta per divenirlo.

ma dobbiamo anche dire che, nato in altra famiglia, egli sarebbe
probabilmente cresciuto qualche cosa di meglio.

suo padre era un fiacchissimo uomo, con un carattere ancor più
debole. in gioventù era stato sempre schiavo degli amici; quando gli
diedero moglie — per strapparlo dalle unghie d’una sgualdrinella,
che, fingendo filare del sentimento, non faceva che pulirlo e poi
ripulirlo indefessamente — egli, che era abituato a vivere da schiavo,
fu spaventato della responsabilità assuntasi; il bastone del comando
in casa sua gli sembrò d’un peso insostenibile e scambiò le parti,
prendendo volontariamente quella dell’obbedire. meno male se la moglie
fosse stata una donna di buon senso, energica, risoluta, ma essa non
era che buona.... sapeva mangiare, si lasciava vestire, e pel resto
si rimetteva a quanto faceva una vecchia cameriera, la quale l’aveva
veduta nascere e l’aveva seguita nel matrimonio. per fortuna quella
valeva qualche cosa ed era onesta, se no, povera casa!

nasce giulio. che cosa volete riesca con un padre il quale non sa cosa
sia volontà, e con una madre la quale dice sempre di sì — gente che
ignora cosa deve essere realmente la vita, e non ha altre idee del
mondo se non queste: che vi sono delle botteghe in cui si compera il
cibo — dei mercanti che vendono gli abiti — e che d’autunno si va in
campagna, perchè c’è l’aria fina?

lasciate fare a lui! a tre anni strilla tutto il santo giorno, rompe
tutto — a quattro, prova che la favella è stata data all’uomo per dir
insolenze. comanda a bacchetta tutte le più strambe enormità.... se
qualcuno s’avvisasse di resistergli..... come luigi xiv imporrebbe
il suo capriccio collo scudiscio — a otto anni fuma, a dieci vien
sfrattato dalla scuola per scandalo.

lo fanno studiare privatamente, perchè finisca d’imparare.... niente
— a quindici anni va.... dapertutto.... — a sedici ha già quattromila
lire di debiti.

padre e madre, come imbecilliti dallo spavento, lasciano fare...., essi
capiscono ch’egli rovinerà la casa, ma come resistere? essi non pensano
che a lagnarsi col terzo e col quarto, ma non sanno fermare il già
terribile dissoluto.

uno zio interviene — cerca far capire la ragione, mettendogli
sott’occhi tutte le conseguenze disastrose e non lontane, perchè la
famiglia è semplicemente e modestamente agiata.

miracolo insperato.... riesce a persuadergli di mutar sistema.

sì, giulio si pente, giulio si impiegherà — e sarà presto un uomo come
si deve.... se, finora, è stato il dolor di capo di casa sua.... si sa
bene.... gioventù.... quella benedetta gioventù!

ecco giulio impiegato.... chi sa, chi sa un giorno cosa diventerà?!

che cosa? aspettate sei mesi. egli ed un amico hanno fatto la
conoscenza di due mime.... che, per una certa mimica..., siamo intesi!
— ma ci vuol molto denaro per scritturarle.... e, denaro, nè l’uno nè
l’altro ne hanno. perdersi d’animo per questo?.... diavolo....! si fa
una cambiale falsa!

la cosa viene scoperta — fulmine in casa bindi — chi corre di qua, chi
corre di là per vedere, per sentire, per rimediare, per assopire.... e,
si intende, per pagare.

giulio è consigliato di dar le sue dimissioni, ed eccolo a spasso tutto
il giorno come un virtuoso senza scrittura.

il padre e la madre non fanno che piangere, non mangiano più.... e in
breve se ne vanno all’altro mondo.

giulio non perde il tempo a piangere.... fa i conti. — vendendo tutto,
gli restano ancor cinquantamila lire....

a ventitrè anni ne ha già mangiate quaranta in buona compagnia.... e
comincia a domandarsi se non gli converrebbe sposar severina.

egli ha conosciuto, due anni prima, severina ai bagni e le ha ispirato
una forte passione — passione tutta sensuale, se volete, ma quel che è
certo è che severina va matta per giulio, tanto, che non solo non gli
ha mai chiesto niente, ma lo colma continuamente di doni di valore,
ch’egli ricambia.... con dei mazzolini di fiori.

giulio non ama severina, ma l’accetta, primo, perchè come donna non è
da disprezzarsi — secondo, perchè egli sa che ella non avrà il cuore di
lasciarlo esposto.... alle intemperie, quando saranno sfumate anche le
ultime diecimila lire.

come si spiega il pazzo furore di severina per giulio? ecco: in amore,
prima di tutto, è difficile spiegare qualche cosa — ma in questo caso
si spiega col dire che giulio era l’ideale d’una fantasia!....

se scriviamo la parola, gridate all’immoralità.

giulio era un bel giovine — non una perfezione, via....; per esempio,
le estremità lasciavano a desiderare — ma aveva nel viso un’espressione
così originale che a certe donne dava il capogiro.

quando egli guardava con intenzione una pecorella desiata, si pensava
all’arcangelo gabriele che, sorridente come un satiro, le dicesse, non
col labbro, col solo sguardo: — non è peccato, veh! —

uno stimolo.... ed insieme un conforto.

ecco quel che aveva sedotto maddalena.

cosa singolare, ella fu iniziata alla vita da un profumo e da un
sorriso.

il profumo di severina le aveva aperto l’animo alla voluttà — il
sorriso di giulio gliene aveva dato la sete — e si sa cos’è la sete....
quando non si può bere.

                                 * * *

una donna può aver sortito la natura più ardente e saper imbrigliare,
se non la propria fantasia, per lo meno i suoi desiderj tanto da poter
attendere, senza soffrire, che spunti il giorno delle nozze legali — le
sole che le insegnarono essere riconosciute dalla società.

ma per aver siffatta forza d’animo, per mantenersi sempre presente a
sè stessa in modo da deludere ogni insidia, in modo da rendersi sorda
alle grida del suo sangue, è necessario che, nella sua educazione,
vi sia stato qualche cosa che l’abbia messa presto in guardia contro
i così detti pericoli. è necessario quindi che le abbiano insegnato
quel pudore che in natura non esiste; che, nelle prime letture, vi sia
stata una direzione; che non abbia fatto le seconde letture; che abbia
avuto la scuola del buon esempio; o che, avendo avuto per caso l’altra
scuola, quei mali esempj abbiano partorito tali funeste conseguenze da
spaventarla e da consigliarle l’apatia siccome la miglior ricetta per
vivere tranquilla.

ma quando una donna cresce senza che le insegnino nulla — senza veder
nulla — senza aver appreso niente alla scuola del mondo, formandosi da
sè stessa sola il proprio carattere, è molto probabile, diremmo certo,
che se non la salvano gli altri, da sè stessa non sappia salvarsi dalle
prime seduzioni, e che ella affretti anzi la sua caduta — perchè il
suo carattere morale non è che il suo temperamento fisico, l’unico
consigliere ch’ella conosca.... senza conoscerlo.

ed è quello che sarebbe avvenuto a maddalena, solo che avesse
conosciuto giulio prima d’aver ricevuto le lezioni di severina, la
quale, facendo un po’ di fisiologia dell’amore, le aveva insegnato
delle cose che per una fanciulla potevano essere utili. — in genere
— le aveva detto fra le altre — una ragazza che ha un amante e
vuol sposarlo, non deve amarlo che platonicamente. l’uomo essendo
cacciatore.... va in giro fiutando per cercare la sua selvaggina,
che è la donna. se la selvaggina pone una condizione al lasciarsi
pigliare.... può essere che l’uomo non sappia resistere allo stimolo
dell’appetito, e per poter mangiare.... accetti la condizione — ossia
sposi.

se la selvaggina invece, sedotta dalle lusinghe del bel cacciatore,
trascura di porre la condizione e non vola via, vien presa,
cucinata.... e divorata.

la condizione della donna nella nostra società è tale che noi dobbiamo
dare — nel fare il primo passo — la maggior importanza a quello che
per noi realmente non ne ha — o se ne ha una.... è negativa — perchè
ponendo sempre quella condizione, molti uccellini dal becco gentile
vedono, con grande dolore, un cacciatore dopo l’altro prendere la fuga
e restano là sempre sul ramo, essi che, poverini, si farebbero pigliare
tanto volontieri.... finchè.... sfiancati dall’ambascia, sfiatati e
spiumati.... cadono e spirano.

questo dico — diceva severina — quando si vuole il matrimonio che nella
nostra società assicura la considerazione.... e il pane, anche se si è
brutte o si ha perduto la profittevole gioventù.

quando si è disposte a farne a meno del matrimonio, e si ha il coraggio
di andar incontro a tutte le incertezze e a tutti i rischi.... allora è
un altro pajo di maniche.

ma allora bisogna anche prendere, e presto, l’offensiva contro gli
uomini.

severina non credette dover spiegare a maddalena che cosa fosse
quest’offensiva.

maddalena voleva il matrimonio — non solo perchè sua madre aveva
sposato suo padre, ma perchè essendo fortemente innamorata di giulio,
non voleva correre il rischio di perderlo col non porre l’accennata
condizione.

ma giulio non accettava. non poteva — diceva egli. — uno zio molto
ricco l’aveva minacciato di privarlo dell’eredità se mai avesse a
prender moglie senza il suo permesso, perchè la moglie voleva dargliela
lui.

lo zio ricco c’era infatti, ma guai a giulio, se dopo l’affare della
cambiale avesse osato pur di salutarlo!

ora giulio — diceva lui — non voleva sposare altra donna che maddalena,
ma bisognava aspettare che lo zio facesse il suo dovere di zio, ossia
prendesse un biglietto d’andata.... senza ritorno — ma intanto potevano
amarsi!!

— sì, amiamoci platonicamente — diceva maddalena — cosa che accomodava
pochissimo a giulio, il quale per la fanciulla aveva un forte
capriccio, reso anche più acuto dalla certezza assoluta d’esserne il
primo amante — ma non comprendeva l’amor platonico e non voleva, nelle
sue circostanze, nemmen fermarsi sulla parola matrimonio, visto che per
la moglie occorreva un bell’appartamento, una buona tavola, un morbido
letto, abiti, cappellini, divertimenti.... tutta roba che costa,
e visto che non conveniva rinunciare a severina, ossia al proprio
benessere futuro.

                                 * * *

amiamoci platonicamente....

ma era platonismo quello?

sì, se platonismo vuol dire.... vuol dire.... allora era platonismo
per loro come lo è per molti amanti, come lo era per quella tal mamma
che diceva: — nè per.... nè per.... la mamma non sgrida mica.... basta
che.... —

a noi pare una ipocrisia, una transazione peggiore del così detto male.

l’amore, nascendo per mezzo dei sensi ed essendo continuamente servito
dai sensi, non può conservarsi perfettamente spirituale. eliminala
la perfezione, siamo ridotti al più o al meno materiale a seconda
degli individui — e per quanto riguarda la sua sfera d’azione, alle
circostanze, alle paure.... ed anche agli interessi.

or, quando in amore non può esservi il più completo abbandono
dell’anima e della materia avvampanti d’una sola fiamma — e si cerca
un _modus vivendi_ — l’amore perde affatto il suo carattere sacro e
diventa una.... mostruosità.

ah! perchè mai, a questo punto, non possiamo scrivere latino?!

maddalena poteva ancor presentarsi come _rosiera_, ma il suo spirito
s’era corrotto e il suo fisico ne risentiva guasti orribili. — e
amava da pochi mesi soltanto! — ma poteva ella, a lungo andare,
uscire vittoriosa da tale lotta? — noi abbiamo veduto quali fenomeni
si manifestassero in lei — che cosa ne pensasse il medico — che
facessero i genitori — e infine la ribellione di maddalena che, quando
l’amorosa febbre fu giunta al parossismo, non volle più saperne di
subordinazione, di convenienze domestiche.

era pronta a tutto.

e glielo disse a giulio, l’indomani — dopo avergli narrato la scena
avuta in casa.

— guarda, giulio.... io spero che non avrò altre noje di questo
genere, ma se mai tornassero ad importunarmi per farmi sposare
quell’imbecille.... o chiunque altro...., io ho già deciso.... io
lascio famiglia e tutto e vengo con te.... e allora avvenga che
vuole.... io sento che non posso essere d’altri che tua! —

queste parole, che avrebbero trasportato in cielo un vero amante,
diedero un colpo mortale al capriccio di giulio — lo spaventarono tanto
che, a sua volta, decise subito in quello stesso istante di troncare
ogni rapporto con maddalena.

ispirare una passione, anche furiosa, lo lusingava, purchè però
questo non avesse mai a frastornare i suoi piani. se maddalena, come
qualche altra di sua conoscenza, si fosse rassegnata, pur con grave
suo sacrifizio, a prender marito, serbando viva la sua passione per
lui giulio.... ah! allora sì.... anzi quello era il da farsi, perchè
il loro amore sarebbe entrato in una fase novella, nella quale i voti
ardentissimi avrebbero trovata larga soddisfazione — ma, maddalena, che
rifiuta un partito conveniente ed è risoluta a rifiutarne quanti altri
possono presentarsi, non solo, ma ad abbandonare la casa paterna per
gettarsi nelle sue braccia.... per sempre!.... ah! questa prospettiva è
spaventevole. —

perdere severina?.... ah! non fia mai! bisognerebbe essere pazzi. e un
giulio commetter pazzie? ma siete matti?

in quel momento, tuttavia, ringraziò con effusione la generosa
fanciulla.... le disse che il di lei sacrifizio lo commoveva fin nelle
viscere — pianse con lei.... sul crudele destino che li perseguitava,
le giurò eterna fede, e la abbracciò e baciò con tale trasporto, che la
povera radazza, sentendosi suggere dalle labbra e la vista e la vita,
non avrebbe certo ricordato le utili teorie di severina.... se egli
in quel punto, temendo una _buona fortuna_ come la più grande delle
sventure, non si fosse imposto un assoluto rispetto....

maddalena partì compresa d’immensa gioja.... e l’ultima sua occhiata,
l’ultima sua stretta di mano dissero a giulio la di lei profonda
riconoscenza.

egli l’aveva risparmiata, quale maggior prova d’amore?

il giorno successivo, giulio s’appostò in modo da non essere veduto da
maddalena; quando, secondo il solito, ella separossi dalla brigida, la
lasciò continuar sola il suo cammino, e raggiunse invece la domestica
consegnandole un biglietto per la giovinetta. quindi s’allontanò.

egli non aveva altro a fare. _era libero!_

maddalena errava tutta mesta e inquieta nella via in cui avveniva
regolarmente il suo incontro con giulio, soffermandosi davanti a questa
e a quella vetrina, dando ad intervalli rapide occhiate or in questa,
or in quella direzione, per veder s’egli giungesse; per la prima volta
giulio non era il primo al convegno — quando con sua sorpresa sentì la
voce di brigida dirle sommesso:

— prenda....; una lettera per lei.

— una lettera di chi?

— di lui.

— oh! dio! — e maddalena, come colta da un triste presentimento,
impallidì; poi: — chi te l’ha data?

— ma lui!

— ma perchè?

— cosa vuole che ne sappia io?

— aspetta — ed entrata in una porticina, aperse e lesse:

      «mia carissima,

  «perdonami se jeri non ti ho detto che ragioni d’interessi mi
  obbligano ad assentarmi per qualche tempo.... ma davvero, in quel
  momento di tanta espansione, io non avevo il coraggio di avvelenare
  la tua purissima gioja con una sgradevole notizia.

  «puoi imaginare se io non farò di tutto per abbreviare la mia
  assenza!

  «quando sarò di ritorno...., credo fra un mese, sarà mia premura
  d’incontrarti.

  «ricordati di me.

                                                  «_tuo affez._ g.»

afflittissima, e tuttavia senza ombra ancora di diffidenza nè di
sospetto, tornò a casa. ma, allora, letto, riletto quel foglio,
meditando a lungo su ogni frase, per quella temenza che prende
sempre chi ama, si turbò. studiando l’atteggiarsi delle parole, per
indovinare, le parve di trovare troppa regolarità.

giulio non poteva sentire alcun dispiacere scrivendo quelle linee....
era freddo. e poi era un esprimersi da uomo innamorato quello? _quando_
sarò di ritorno.... _credo_ fra un mese.... quando? credo? e per
un mese egli la lasciava senza nuove — e non ne desiderava di lei?
_ricordati_ di me...? ed egli? e dove andava? ragioni d’interesse? la
sua mente si perdeva.... ella ebbe paura e pianse.

ma quel pianto non poteva essere lungo. quasi subito si rivide, il
giorno prima, in compagnia di giulio, che la rendeva pazzo di felicità
— e a quella visione incantevole, ogni timore sgombrò.

era allora la fine d’aprile. attese con pazienza, con quanto dolorosa
pazienza lo dican gli innamorati, che passasse quel benedetto mese.

ma quando fu scorso.... e uno, due.... dieci altri giorni si
successero, senza ch’egli comparisse.... allora ella non ebbe più la
forza di reggere al tormento, che ogni giorno si faceva sempre più
atroce.... e andò a casa di lui.

— il signor giulio bindi è tornato? — chiese alla portinaja.

— dice?

— il signor giulio bindi.

— non lo conosco.

— ma se abita qui!

— qui non abita nessuno.... nè lui.... nè altri. —

a tali parole per lei insensate, maddalena cominciando a credere di
parlare con una demente, disse:

— ma come!... non si ricorda più d’avermi veduta molte volte passare in
compagnia del signor giulio bindi?

— oh! sarà benissimo! — e la portinaja ebbe uno strano indecifrabil
sorriso — ne passan molte qui in compagnia.... ma qui non si domanda il
nome di alcuno.

— ah! dio.... permetta che sieda.... perchè io mi sento male. —

maddalena aveva la fronte coperta di freddo sudore, e si sentiva
infatti svenire....

dopo essere stata un momento seduta, appoggiata alla spalliera, muta,
il capo chino, gli occhi velati, respirando con affanno.... ripreso
coraggio, fissando quella donna, esclamò:

— ma allora...?!

— ma allora — fe’ ruvidamente colei impazientata a siffatta scena, che
le pareva incomprensibile — allora questa è una...

— ah! — stridette maddalena raccapricciando, e balzata in piedi, colle
mani nei capelli, fuggì....

— quante sciocchezze! — borbottò la portinaia sedendo e ripigliando la
sua calza.

                                 * * *

quando maddalena fu nella via, avvedutasi che tre o quattro persone
s’erano fermate di botto osservandola con curiosità, diventò rossa. con
uno sforzo pensò a darsi un contegno più dicevole per una giovinetta,
e tornò a casa — ma tremava tutta, i suoi denti battevano e le labbra
erano bianche. i singulti le straziavan la gola, e la sua mente
sconvolta così s’agitava:

— la sua casa!.... la sua _casa_!.... e io non avevo capito niente? ma
come capire, se io non sapevo niente? ah! giulio, tu mi tradisci.....
ma se mi tradisci..... guai!.... un mese.... ragioni d’interessi....
bugiardo!.... ah! se ti trovo.... se.... e ora dov’è? come potrò
rintracciarlo? come?.... come.... ah! sì.... sì.... già.... che me ne
importa poi a me della sua famiglia.... di tutti i motivi che possono
aver la sua famiglia e lui.... e tutto il mondo!?... sì, andrò da sua
sorella.... e.... e per dio! che allora saprò dove si può andarlo a
cercare! —

alla certezza che fra poco avrebbe saputo tutto, si fece un po’ più
calma. ma come sbattevano ancora quelle palpebre!

senza por un minuto in mezzo, giunta a casa, salì immediatamente da
severina e tirò il cordone del campanello.

ma in luogo di vedersi schiudere al solito, udì un leggiero sfregamento
nell’uscio, e tosto, all’aperta spia, le apparvero gli occhi inquieti
della domestica.

— c’è severina?

— sì.... ma c’è gente.... — rispose quella a bassa voce e con aria
misteriosa.

— allora tornerò. ho bisogno di parlarle.

— torni, sì.... ma domani.... e... più tardi.

— va bene. —

la spia si chiuse, e maddalena scese sospirando. bisognava attendere
ventiquattro ore.

fu bene per tutti che severina in quel momento avesse gente — se no,
alle rivelazioni di maddalena, chi sa quali scene sarebbero seguite!
allora non vi sarebbe stato certo un incidente che, se mise alla prova
la bontà del cervello di maddalena.... fu anche la medicina che la
guarì per sempre del suo amore.

                                 * * *

la giornata fu tanto lunga e uggiosa per maddalena, che ella non
aspettò la notte per coricarsi. il crepuscolo cominciava appena
quand’ella chiuse, contro il solito, le imposte, e si pose a letto. le
pareva che, circondandosi di tenebre, non solo i suoi occhi, ma anche
la mente, potessero cessare di vedere — e riposare. ma s’ingannava.

le giovanissime e robuste membra avrebbero avuto piuttosto bisogno
d’una eccessiva fatica fisica per poter esser fiaccate e ridotte in
balìa del sonno.

nella pienezza delle forze, dopo tante commozioni, in un simile stato
d’esasperazione, credere che fra le coltri, nell’oscurità, in una calda
sera di giugno, il travaglio dell’anima e dei sensi potesse scemare,
era un errore, di cui ella dovè ben presto sentire gli effetti.

allora il cervello s’accese, e se prima aveva solo sospettato, temuto
il tradimento.... allora maddalena, senza alcun sforzo, se ne fece una
realtà con colori tali che le tolsero ogni lume di ragione.

avvoltata nel lenzuolo, s’agitava sul letto, inconscia di sè,
abbandonandosi a tutte le stravaganze che, in quello stato morboso,
divenuta preda di sè stessa, la passione le imponeva. era un delirio.

or inveiva contro giulio, caricandolo d’improperj — or gli rivolgeva
dimande, e poi, come se avesse avuto risposta, gli replicava
furiosa.... e il dialogo continuava fra il suo labbro e la sua
mente....

piangeva.... narrava le sue torture.... supplicava e.... s’adirava di
nuovo.... ma tosto — le era forse stata detta una parola, una menzogna
pietosa.... perdonava, gli rivolgeva i più teneri accenti — il sereno
era tornato, rideva, si confessava pazza.... chiedeva scusa. — seguiva
un lungo silenzio, pareva assopito. ma quindi si ridestava in un nuovo
accesso di furore....; il tradimento era provato....!

«sei andato con lei....! chi è? voglio saperlo! voglio ucciderla.... e
te pure ucciderò.... ma.... dilaniarti voglio!»

il farneticamento durò più ore.... poi il sonno tanto invocato, e
invano, al coricarsi, la colpì fulmineo.

batteva il tocco dopo mezzanotte quando si svegliò. si sentiva alquanto
ristorata — la mente era un po’ confusa, ma calma. ricordava il patito
trambusto, ma con indifferenza....; l’esaurimento di forze la rendeva
insensibile al dolore. aveva solo una sete ardente — accese il lume e
bevè.

poi, coll’occhio semichiuso, affaticato, stette qualche tempo
appoggiata alla spalliera, immobile, senza pensiero....

a un tratto le parve di sentirsi male, d’essere oppressa dal caldo, di
non poter più respirare.

lentamente lasciossi scorrere giù dal letto, e vacillante mosse alla
finestra ad aprirne le vetriate. sedutasi quindi là, respirò avidamente
per procurarsi qualche sollievo, ma non ne ottenne, chè non spirava un
filo d’aria.

ai primi di giugno, la temperatura era già torrida. da un mese e
più non cadeva una stilla di pioggia. fra la notte e il giorno unica
differenza era l’assenza del sole. la stagione quell’anno era troppo
bella, e gli uomini invocavano fulmini e tempeste che li liberassero da
tanto felice primavera.

dopo un quarto d’ora d’inutile attendere, maddalena, non provando alcun
refrigerio, stava per tornarsene a letto, quando udì chiudersi forte lo
sportello della porta di casa. ciò non la interessava punto, ma quando
vi si aggiunse un rumor di passi nell’androne, vi prestò attenzione.
chi poteva venir a casa a quell’ora? non era nelle abitudini di alcuno
degli inquilini. severina forse?... ma il passo era d’uomo.... il
rumore cessò.... l’uomo saliva. maddalena continuò a porger orecchio, e
ben presto la sua piccola curiosità fu appagata.

le imposte di una finestra furono schiuse, e una voce maschile, che
veniva dalla camera di severina, disse: «ma qui si soffoca!» maddalena,
al suono di quella voce, balzò in piedi, col sangue rimescolato....
e stette un momento, prestando sempre orecchio, tutta ansante, colle
occhiaje spalancate. era.... non era.... non poteva credere....
attendeva qualche altra parola per avere una certezza qualunque.

e l’ebbe subito. un _no_ alto, sonoro, squillò, e vi tenne dietro un
argentino riso di donna.

maddalena mandò un gemito. v’era la peggiore, la più temuta delle
certezze. era lui! allora, sconvolta, quasi demente, corse a soffiare
sul lume, poi, a piedi nudi, brancolando nel bujo, riuscì di nuovo alla
finestra, e con cautela, per non essere udita, ne socchiuse le gelosie
tanto da poter vedere senza essere veduta.

sulle prime le fu impossibile distinguere bene, perchè la notte era
chiara, e nella camera il lume era collocato in modo che dalla finestra
di maddalena non si vedeva d’illuminato che una piccola parte del
pavimento presso il terrazzino.

ma presto la scena mutò, ossia divenne più ampia e meglio visibile....,
troppo.

giulio, che era seduto, celato dal fogliame del terrazzino, si alzò e
mosse per entrare nella camera, ma si fermò nel vano della finestra.
parlava con qualcuno, ma non si udiva nulla.

prese quindi il lume, ch’era sur un mobile a lui vicinissimo, e
s’avanzò lentamente verso il fondo della camera. posò il lume sur
un tavolino da notte, e si trasse in disparte facendosi invisibile a
maddalena.

allora la camera si rischiarò tutta, e la fanciulla vide il letto,
e sovr’esso, in posa languida, colle mani che s’intrecciavano sulla
fronte, il seno ignudo, severina.

i suoi occhi parevano chiusi.... parlava a spizzico.... e sbadigliava
di tanto in tanto.... sorridendo deliziosamente.

a un tratto si scosse da quella specie di torpore, certamente
artificiale, e coll’indice accennò alla finestra, ordinando alcunchè.

ma, siccome non veniva obbedita, fe’ un celere movimento ed era per
balzar dal letto — ma trattenuta — parve — da una parola o da un gesto,
si mise nuovamente a giacere nella posa primiera.

maddalena vide allora ricomparire giulio alla finestra e, preso il
cordone, farne calare la tenda....

furibonda a tale atto, fu sul punto di gridare.... — ella voleva
sapere, tutto sapere, avesse anche dovuto perdere la vita in quell’ora
— ma la _speranza_ (!) di non essere delusa del tutto, che ancor
restasse qualche spiraglio, le diè la forza di frenarsi.

non _sperò_ indarno; chè se la tenda dapprima scese tutta fino al
suolo, un leggier cigolío disse subito che si voleva lasciare un vano
in alto per non togliere affatto la possibilità di ventilazione alla
camera.

maddalena ebbe quindi la triste consolazione di rivedere la camera fra
un interstizio di circa una spanna.

ma di visibile ora non v’era che la parte superiore del letto, poco più
del guanciale. — tuttavia a maddalena bastava.

essa, dopo qualche minuto, vide severina con gesto vezzoso chiamare a
sè giulio, come se desiderasse qualche cosa — e poscia, dovendo aver
ricevuto un diniego, mettersi a finger di frignare, agitando la mano.

allora giulio s’avvicinò al letto e porse a severina il suo sigaro
acceso.

quella, non più frignante, soddisfatta, si mise a fumare
beatissimamente.

indi giulio sturò una bottiglia e versò del vino color ambra in due
calici, offrendone uno a severina.

ella si levò reggendosi sul gomito, preso il calice, vi posò le labbra
e libò lentissimamente, guardando _lui_.

gli rese poi il cristallo, e, come affaticata, si lasciò cadere il capo
sul guanciale, coll’occhio semispento sempre in lui, e col sorriso di
chi muore vedendo aprirsi il cielo.

egli si curvò a baciarla, e si rizzò quindi facendo colla mano: —
aspetta.

maddalena, per quanto si tenesse aggrappata con una mano alla ringhiera
colla disperazione del naufrago, non poteva più sostenersi. l’altra
mano, che teneva socchiuse e a un tempo unite le gelosie, era in tal
convulsione che le imposte, come per vento, s’agitavano.

e.... un’ora ebbe il coraggio di restar là.... tremante di odio....
grondante di sudore, or gelido, or cocente — ma quando in quella
camera, ad un tratto, si spense ogni luce.... anche le sue forze si
spensero e cadde inginocchioni come tramortita.

— maddalena! — gridò la madre dalla stanza attigua, destatasi di
soprassalto al rumore che la figlia nel cadere aveva fatto, rovesciando
la sedia e urtando nella vetriata.

la fanciulla con un sforzo eroico ricuperò in un lampo gli spiriti, e
potè persino dire con calma:

— che vuoi, mamma?

— ma cosa fai?

— nulla, m’era caduto il libro e sono andata giù a raccoglierlo.

— ma ti pajon queste le ore da leggere?

— ecco, ho finito. —

allora si mosse, si buttò sul letto di traverso e vide farsi
giorno, senza che dagli occhi accesi potesse spremersi una lagrima,
straziandosi il seno colle unghie per impedirsi di urlare.

quando il primo raggio di sole entrò a dirle che poteva alzarsi....
guardossi le mani.... erano sanguinolenti.... guardossi nello
specchio.... si metteva orrore — era una furia. — fece per scender dal
letto.... non potè.... era tutta attrappita e indolenzita.

si cacciò fra le coltri, ove la stanchezza e la luce del dì riuscirono
ad assopirla.

                                 * * *

quando risvegliossi, era mezzogiorno e più.

sulle prime guardossi intorno smemorata, ma quando il suo occhio
posossi sulla finestra ancor aperta.... allora le si presentò alla
mente tutta la terribile notte, rivide l’odioso quadro, e balzò dal
letto coll’impeto d’una fiera....

quello doveva essere il giorno della vendetta.... quale, poi, ella non
sapeva... ella sapeva solo che voleva vendicarsi — e di entrambi!

ma prima, di giulio...; vederlo, fingere di ignorare, trangugiarsi
tutte le di lui menzogne.... e poi.... e poi.... oh! l’ira l’avrebbe
ben ispirata! — dopo.... avrebbe pensato a severina.

si vestì per uscire.... ponendo una cura speciale in ogni minuzia
della sua _toilette_. voleva essere bellissima.... onde giulio avesse a
sentire tutta la perdita ch’egli faceva in quel giorno.... sciocco!

stava abbottonandosi i guanti quando fe’ capolino nella camera
la madre, curva, gelatinosa, che vedendo la figlia vestita fe’ le
meraviglie.

— come!.... ti credeva ancora a letto io.... sono venuta qua tre volte,
ma dormivi sempre, ed io ti ho lasciata stare. vedi cosa vuol dire
legger troppo! vai fuori?

— sì.

— non fai colazione?

— no.

— vuoi che te la prepari?

— no.

— vai, senza neanche salutarmi?

— sì.... addio.

— sei sempre in collera per l’affar del matrimonio....? oh! che
tosa.... —

maddalena era già sul pianerottolo e non udiva più.

quando fu abbasso, si fermò, domandandosi dove andava. ella aveva
pensato a tutto fuorchè a questo. fortunatamente ricordò che giulio
frequentava due dei principali caffè. là qualcuno avrebbe saputo
indicargli il domicilio di lui.

e si avviava, quando s’imbattè nella fantesca di severina, che veniva
dalla strada.

— spero che non sarà salita dalla signora — disse quella.

— perchè? — fe’ maddalena, fermandosi punta da sospetto.

— perchè non avrebbe potuto riceverla. c’è gente anche oggi.

— ah! — e suo malgrado la fanciulla arrossì per tosto impallidire. — è
quel giovinotto che è venuto da lei jeri sera tardi?

— come lo sa? — e la fantesca la guardava sorpresa.

— diavolo.... non vi sono segreti fra me e severina.... anzi.... prima
di uscire voglio salire a salutarli.

— ma....

— ma che cosa? lo conosco molto io quel giovine.

— e se la mia signora mi sgrida?

— non temere.... mi credi forse capace di commettere un’indiscrezione?

— faccia lei. —

salirono, la domestica aperse, e maddalena si precipitò nell’anticamera.

— dove sono?

— là....

— bene. —

maddalena, coll’occhio sfavillante d’ira e di gioja a un tempo,
spalancò l’uscio indicatole dalla servente, e si presentò sulla soglia,
colle braccia incrociate sul seno, squadrando severina e giulio che
stavano a un tavolino facendo colazione.

— ma bravi! — esclamò essa.

giulio si turbò.... ma subito si ricompose.

quanto a severina, dopo un primo moto di sorpresa, represse la noja che
le cagionava quella visita intempestiva, e disse cortese:

— avanti.... avanti. che buon vento? —

maddalena s’avanzò fino al tavolino. una convulsione, che si sforzava
invano di padroneggiare, le agitava le membra. l’ira e il dolore erano
così intensi che voleva prorompere e non poteva disserrar le labbra.

s’appoggiò coi pugni alla mensa.... e guardò per qualche istante or
l’una, or l’altro.

giulio non diceva parola, e a capo chino attendeva rassegnato la
burrasca.

severina, che non capiva nulla, disse freddamente:

— ma di’ un po’, maddalena, si potrebbe sapere....? —

la fanciulla allora ruppe in uno scroscio di riso così stridulo, così
spasmodico che pareva pazza.... e fe’, con accento che a giulio mise i
brividi:

— che bravi commedianti siete voi.... per darla ad intendere al
mondo!.... suo fratello! ah! ah! ah!.... tuo fratello! —

severina guardò attonita giulio, il quale fece un movimento per
alzarsi — ma maddalena gli afferrò il braccio e lo forzò a star seduto,
gridandogli furente:

— se ti muovi.... se dici una parola.... ti schiaffeggio, sai! brutta
faccia smorta!.... —

e allora, vedendoli ambedue allibbiti e tremanti, sentì come un
disdegno supremo di dir altro a simil gente.

guardò per l’ultima volta giulio, concentrando in quell’ultima tutta la
nausea, tutto il disprezzo, quindi volte le spalle ai due, lentamente,
dignitosa, grande.... uscì.

era guarita.

                                 * * *

due mesi dopo, il signor paolo minelli, detto _minella bellabarba_,
notissimo e grosso merciajo, memore della felicità goduta colla prima
moglie, di cui piangeva da dieci mesi la «_ahi! immatura perdita_» —
per regalarsi, cosa di suo pieno diritto, di nuova felicità, sposava,
a cinquant’anni, ornato di precoce e perfetta calvizie, la signora
maddalena papetti....

precisamente così.




abbiamo detto che maddalena, dopo quel piccolo e innocuo sfogo in
casa di severina, ne partì guarita. il disprezzo aveva ucciso in lei
amore e dolore.... uscendo da quelle camere le pareva di non aver mai
conosciuto nè giulio, nè severina. felice natura! buona stoffa!

qualche altra ragazza avrebbe pensato al suicidio — ed ella, non eran
scorsi otto giorni che cominciava a ringrassare.... non poteva più
vedere il caffè tostato, odiava il sale e gli agrumi, e quanto alle
bibite spiritose, si limitava già ad un uso ragionevole.

aveva tutto obliato, tanto che una sera li incontrò per via e non sentì
al cuore la più lieve puntura, nè al cervello la più piccola onda di
freddo o di caldo.

e quando lesse sur un cartellino alla porta che l’appartamento, di
severina era da affittarsi «_anche al presente_,» ebbe un sorriso di
compiacimento. — e quando, pochi giorni dopo, severina traslocò, non
volle nemmeno fermarsi in casa, e per poter star fuori tutto il dì,
trascinò i papetti ad una scampagnata, in cui finalmente fu fatta la
pace, per sempre, fra le potenze, senza umiliazioni da nessuna parte,
ma con abbracci e inaffiamenti analoghi.

la sera stavano sotto tutti e tre.

                                 * * *

a diciassette anni, però, non si caccia un amore senza sostituirvi un
nuovo amore o qualcos’altro. quelle che vanno al conservatorio, per
esempio, possono ingolfarsi nell’arte.... che permette poi molti altri
surrogati — ma maddalena che non andava al conservatorio?

e sentiva un vuoto, un malessere, una impazienza, una noja, una smania
senza scopo.... avrebbe voluto non vedersi più in quella città....
cambiar aria.... fare un’altra vita....

fu allora che si pentì d’aver perduto volontariamente l’occasione
di maritarsi. oh! il suo sacrificio aveva proprio avuto una bella
ricompensa! se quel maggiordomo si fosse presentato di nuovo.... ella
l’avrebbe accolto a braccia aperte. ma ora tutto era guastato, ed il
suo orgoglio non le permetteva certamente di mandargli a dire che aveva
mutato pensiero.

allora disse: — il primo che mi capita, foss’anche lo spazzacamino,
purchè possa mantenermi, lo sposo. lodevole risoluzione.... e
tutt’altro che rara. e si può anche aggiungere che, sapendosi di una
donna che è giunta a tal grado di.... filosofia...., è quasi lecito
dire che cosa sarà un giorno.

quando si è in simili disposizioni e si è belle ragazze non si ha che
a fare un po’ la civetta e.... lo spazzacamino, con un briciolo di
pazienza, si trova.

e lo trovò anche maddalena, e più presto di quanto sperava.

il signor paolo minelli....

un momento.... omettevamo di menzionare un incidente....
insignificante, per verità, in sè stesso, ma che per una certa
relazione che ha col resto del racconto, non vuol essere taciuto.

                                 * * *

i signori soranzi, proprietarj della casa in cui abitavano i papetti,
avevano un figlio — unico — che si chiamava oreste, e «faceva»
l’ultimo anno di legge all’università. venuto a passare in famiglia
le feste di dicembre, gli avvenne, la mattina del giorno di natale,
d’incontrare maddalena che, colla madre, tornava dall’aver ascoltato le
indispensabili tre messe.

vederla, restar stupefatto e invaghirsene fu una cosa sola. durante gli
studj universitari, egli aveva perduto di vista maddalena, che prima,
d’altronde, e per la troppa giovinezza e per il suo modo di vestirsi e
di acconciarsi, non attirava certo lo sguardo.

ma rivederla ora nel fiore de’ suoi vezzi, colla fisonomia animata dal
primo amore di cui gustava, solo da un mese, il primo miele, ricordarsi
d’un.... bruco e trovare una splendida farfalla.... come non restarne
colpito?

l’effetto del colpo si vide subito. ogni festa egli salutava
l’università e veniva a bearsi un momento gli sguardi nella bella
fanciulla.

egli salutava — ella chinava il capo per quella deferenza convenzionale
che ha l’inquilino pel padrone di casa, e tutto finiva lì.

era meno di niente, ma bastava a lui per riscaldarsi sempre più. è quel
che avviene a ventiquattro anni.

voleva parlarle.... voleva farsi meglio capire da lei — ma come fare?
ella era sempre accompagnata.

finalmente una domenica — di marzo — essendo per caso sul balcone, vide
maddalena uscire.... sola. non era scorso un minuto ch’egli si trovava
al fianco della fanciulla, tutto ansante, e stava già per levarsi il
cappello e dirigerle la parola.... ma ella a quell’atto finse di non
riconoscerlo, si fece rossa di dispetto — egli credette di pudore —
calò il velo, e affrettando il passo verso una chiesa poco lontana, vi
entrò....

oreste avrebbe fatto molto bene se l’avesse seguita, perchè avrebbe
scoperto che facendo le viste di andar in chiesa a prender lezioni di
dottrina cristiana, maddalena entrava dalla porta maggiore.... usciva
tosto dalla porticina di dietro, e di là si recava alla casa di giulio
— e tale scoperta l’avrebbe guarito perfettamente.

invece egli si fermò per paura di far paura alla timida cervetta.... e
se ne tornò a casa più innamorato di prima. — «oh! io sono stanco di
far questa vita — diceva fra sè — _adesso_ prendo la laurea e poi la
sposo. è povera.... ma sono ricco io, e basta.» —

le cose fino al giugno andarono avanti così, anzi peggio, perchè
maddalena non ebbe più occasioni di andar in chiesa all’ora della
dottrina cristiana.

ma in giugno, verso la metà, mancando poche settimane a finire il
corso, oreste pensò che era tempo di fare il primo passo. e scritta una
bella lettera di dichiarazione, la consegnò alla portinaia, perchè la
facesse tenere in gran segreto a maddalena. quindi partì.

la risposta era desiderata per la prima domenica.

la lettera fu consegnata, e maddalena, per quanto potesse desiderare un
buon partito, fu ben sorpresa di vedere che aspirava a lei nientemeno
che il figlio del padrone di casa. da quella brava fanciulla che era, e
anche per far presto — avendone abbastanza di quanto aveva passato con
giulio — diede la lettera ai genitori, i quali strabiliarono e piansero
di contentezza.

ma la gioja.... ahimè! fu breve.

il padre papetti, presentatosi al padre soranzi e mostratagli la
lettera del figlio dicendogli «che era venuto per prendere i debiti
concerti fra genitori, come è uso in simili casi» — ebbe la sgradita
sorpresa di vedersi stracciar la lettera sul muso e di sentirsi dire:

— mio figlio è matto.... vi rimedierò io.... spero che, dal canto loro,
la cosa non avrà seguito.... altrimenti dovrò pregarli di andarsene da
casa mia. —

papetti, esterrefatto, colpito da paralisi, non fu capace di dire più
di «sissignore....» e non si riebbe che quando, restato solo, comprese
che si doveva uscire.

il padre soranzi partì e tornò dopo due giorni — il figlio sospese le
sue gite festive — e non se ne parlò più.

il padre papetti disse in casa con calma e dignità che non avevano
potuto intendersi sul capitolo interesse e che quindi non bisognava
pensarvi altro. — «del resto.... meglio! — aggiunse — il signorino è
troppo giovane per essere un buon marito; per maddalena ci vuole un
uomo posato. e lo troverai.... sta pur sicura!»

papetti — chi l’avrebbe mai detto? — fu profeta.

                                 * * *

il signor paolo minelli — detto _minella bellabarba_ — stava di casa
ed aveva anche, da venti anni, il negozio, precisamente di fronte
all’abitazione di maddalena.... quindi aveva veduto nascere, come
si dice, la fanciulla. più tardi ne aveva ammirato la serietà e la
gravità, e diceva sempre a sua moglie: «se io avessi una figlia, vorrei
che fosse come quella ragazza lì.»

ma la figlia non venne mai — anzi, anche la moglie, forse perchè si
vedeva inutile, pensò bene d’andarsene anche lei.

rimasto vedovo, dopo qualche tempo sentì che quel gran dolore che
aveva messo sul cartellone funerale non lo opprimeva più.... egli
voleva ancora essere addolorato per sempre, e quindi sospirava, parlava
continuamente della morta, ne vantava le virtù: — «una donna come
quella!» — ma in sostanza, più che pensare alla trapassata, sentiva
delle aspirazioni verso le presenti.

maddalena aveva allora compiuto la sua metamorfosi, e il nostro buon
minelli non potè a meno di restar colpito da quella trasformazione,
per cui, conservandosi sempre quella ragazza costumata, seria, grave,
ecc., aveva acquistato anche le qualità più appetibili. quella era
la perfezione, perchè ve n’era per il morale e anche per il fisico, e
minella voleva appunto che le due cose non andassero disgiunte.

cominciò dal formar dei desiderj e, ai sospiri per la defunta, mesceva
quelli per la viva.

a cinquant’anni gli occorreva una ragazza soda. nulla di meglio di
maddalena, ch’era soda di carattere — e di carni.

ma come aver l’animo di farsi innanzi?

egli la conosceva....; in addietro, per molto tempo le aveva dato anche
del _tu_ — ma da qualche anno si stava sul _lei_.... questo non voleva
dir niente, ma egli si sentivo in soggezione. se non avesse saputo —
il papetti non aveva potuto a meno di sfogarsi con qualcuno e la cosa
s’era propalata — se non avesse dunque saputo del rifiuto dato da
maddalena a quell’altro, avrebbe avuto un coraggio da don giovanni....
ma così, sebbene si ritenesse ancora.... con poche ragioni, un
bell’uomo — tuttavia non poteva nascondersi che cinquanta e diciassette
anni, nel matrimonio, stanno male insieme. si possono tutt’al più
giocare al lotto.

ma ogni qualvolta egli la vedeva, la tentazione diveniva sempre più
forte.... finchè una notte dovette prendere il partito di commettere la
corbelleria.... ossia di tentar di commetterla. avrebbe rifiutato anche
lui....; pazienza! se non altro sarebbe uscito d’incertezza.... e gli
sarebbe sempre restata la consolazione della volpe.

maddalena, dacchè s’occupava tanto della sua _toilette_, andava
spesso nel negozio minelli — per cui il nostro innamorato ebbe presto
l’occasione di parlare.

per attaccar discorso, cominciò dal dirle che gli pareva, da qualche
tempo, di non vederla più con quella sua amica.

maddalena rispose che aveva capito non esser quella un’amica per lei.

allora minelli, felicemente ispirato, disse che aveva ragione, perchè
una ragazza bella, buona, onesta, laboriosa come lei... insomma,
questo.... insomma, quell’altro.... conchiudendo con una frase che
doveva servir di addentellato — «beato chi sposerà una donnina cara
come lei!» —

ah! minelli in quell’istante aveva proprio l’occhio del pesce morto....
il che, con quella stortatura di collo, con quella gran barba nera
e quei riflessi di luce sull’eburneo cranio, formavo un complesso
abbastanza comico.

maddalena capì che c’era qualche cosa, disse fra sè: — il mio uomo è
forse qui! — e lasciandogli allora piovere lentamente negli occhi uno
sguardo languido, affettuoso, disse solo:

— crede?

— ah! sì.... ma bisogna anche aver un coraggio da leone per osar di
aspirare alla sua mano.

— perchè? — fe’ essa mostrando grande sorpresa.

— dico così, perchè so che ella ha già rifiutato un buon partito.

— non mi piaceva.... ed io ho avuto un po’ paura. —

con che grazia disse questo. pareva umiliata del suo stesso rifiuto.

minelli allora, lisciandosi la lunga barba e facendosi pettoruto
per mettersi tutto in rilievo — ma balbettando — sentiva avvicinarsi
l’istante fatale della sentenza:

— chi sa.... chi sa che cosa ella desidera!... chi sa quali
pretensioni.... giustissime del resto....

— io?.... oh! signor iddio! — quanta umiltà in quella scrollatina di
testa e nello sguardo dolcissimo. come a dire: «sono gli altri che
devono degnarsi di me.... non io degli altri.»

il povero uomo sentissi conturbato da capo a piedi.... tanto che ella
fece un grazioso inchino accompagnato da un «riverisco,» ed uscì, senza
che egli potesse più dir una parola.

maddalena passò tre giorni di fila davanti a quella bottega senza
entrarvi, ma ricercando evidentemente collo sguardo il minelli, che
accorreva subito sulla soglia a salutarla.... ella, che s’era fermata
_per caso_ davanti alla vetrina, rispondeva _arrossendo_.

il quarto giorno, maddalena tornando a casa, verso le cinque, notato
dall’opposto marciapiedi che minelli era solo in bottega, attraversò la
via ed entrò.

— vede.... pover uomo? — esclamò sospiroso il merciajo — qui solo come
un cane. mentre tanti hanno moglie e non sanno che farne.... io....

— e perchè non la prende?

— perchè amo una donna sola.... e non so come dirglielo.

— è così difficile?

— ah! sì.... è troppo bella! —

maddalena sembrò non capire nemmeno che si potesse trattar di lei —
disse solo sorridente e buona:

— e allora.... se non glielo dice.... non lo saprà mai. —

poi tacque e arrossì sotto il di lui sguardo luccicante.

egli, dopo un istante d’imbarazzo..... si fece cuore. — chinatosi, le
prese una mano, che stette qualche tempo a contemplare in estasi....
poi si levò lentamente un anello dal mignolo e glielo posò sulla rosea
estremità dell’anulare.... e, respirando con affanno, mormorò:

— ecco.... gliel’ho detto.... ora attendo la risposta. —

ella tacque alquanto, meditabonda, mesta.... poscia con voce commossa
e con due lagrime — due perle! diceva minelli quella sera all’osteria —
disse con espressione di riconoscenza:

— grazie. —

indi uscì.... portando con sè l’anello.

minelli era solo, ma gridò come fosse sur un palcoscenico: «oh! gioja!»

un’ora dopo, egli faceva la sua prima visita ai papetti — e, come s’è
visto, fu un matrimonio a vapore.

— per noi già non occorrono nè informazioni, nè lo studio del caratteri
— diceva minelli. — ci siamo sempre conosciuti! —

il mattino susseguente la domanda del merciajo, papetti volle proprio
incontrar soranzi padre e dirglielo:

— sa poi.... mia figlia sposa nientemeno che il signor minelli.

— perchè niente più? — ribattè l’altro, ironico.

— oh! è abbastanza.

— chi si contenta, gode. piacere tanto! — e, salutatolo coll’indice, se
ne andò.

— che rabbia che ha! — disse papetti fra sè con una buona fregatina.




quando un uomo prende una donna come moglie, l’ultima cosa di cui si
preoccupa — quando pur se ne preoccupa — è l’opinione vera che questa
donna abbia di lui e perchè ella acconsenta a sposarlo.

gli basta d’essere sposato, e include nel fatto che ella nutra la
«grande stima» e «l’ardente amore per lui». — ora, quando un uomo
si trova nelle condizioni che devono piuttosto alienare da lui, che
avvicinargli una bella fanciulla, come mai non si spaventa all’udire
che essa acconsente a divenir sua.... tutta sua? e invece se ne
rallegra.... e crede che gli altri se ne rallegrino con lui sul serio!?

è vero che ve n’è anche di quelli, i quali, quando si sono messi in
mente di sposare quella tal donna, la vogliono a qualunque costo....
e la sposano persino sapendo che ella non sa proprio cosa farsene di
loro — anzi forse appunto per questo — come se il possedere un corpo
inanimato o animato da spiriti ostili e disposto necessariamente alla
vendetta, fosse cosa invidiabile. — e voi cosa volete farci?


così noi sappiamo che il signor minelli condusse a casa la sua sposina,
convinto di due cose: — ch’egli era il di lei primo amore e che ella
era fior di roba.

e maddalena seppe tanto bene inebbriarlo, stordirlo colla bellezza,
colle sue carezze, e colle arti apprese alla scuola di giulio, che egli
vi perdette la testa. avrebbe dovuto sospettare qualche cosa.... non è
vero... a tanta scienza....? ma egli non poteva sospettare; egli diceva
semplicemente: — «questa è una donna!.... altro che la mia prima!» —
e siccome non s’era mai trovato a simile festa, — l’abbiamo detto, —
perdette la testa.

qui bisogna sapere ch’egli in origine era un povero garzone di negozio,
al quale si poteva predire anche.... nessun avvenire. la fortuna volle
che a sua madre venisse in mente di farlo entrare in uno dei così detti
_oratorj_. — sono congregazioni di gente di tutte le età e condizioni,
la quale i giorni festivi si diverte, prima di pranzo, in una cappella,
per quattro o cinque ore, ascoltando delle messe, delle prediche,
cantando a squarciagola dei _magnificat_, dei _maria mater gratiæ_,
ecc. — e dopo pranzo, in un giardino.... non troppo all’inglese,
giocando ai birilli e alle pallottole — con finale purificazione
serale, dei maggiori, all’osteria.

all’oratorio un sacerdote prese a voler bene al nostro minelli, per la
di lui dolcezza e ingenuità, coprendolo della sua protezione e, venuto
il tempo, gli trovò anche la moglie.

era una fanciulla di trent’anni, discretamente tarlata, se non nella
virtù, nel fisico, ma che portava una ventina di mille lire nel
grembiale.

dormiva poco, mangiava meno, scopava molto ed era tanto economa da
far dire che le mancava persino il cuore di mirarsi nello specchio per
paura di sciuparlo. senza idee al di là della calza, un ghiaccio per
quello che di solito infiamma le donne — e infine religiosa.

questo non occorreva nemmen dirlo.

ebbene, un simile matrimonio passò venti anni sereni e tranquilli,
in cui se non si contribuì alla propagazione della specie, si misero
insieme onestamente altre centomila lire, cosicchè quando minelli
prese la seconda moglie, era padrone di centoventimila lire, oltre
l’avviamento del negozio, che ogni anno prosperava sempre più.

sposare maddalena, e mutarsi il vento e tutto andare a precipizio fu
una cosa sola.

                                 * * *

con quali idee era entrata maddalena nel matrimonio? con nessuna e
con tutte. avrebbe veduto e, a seconda delle circostanze, si sarebbe
regolata.

l’importante per lei era maritarsi.... per le ragioni che conosciamo.

il marito era ricce.... «tanto meglio! — si disse — godremo la vita.
ormai già non mi resta a far altro a questo mondo.»

e si accinse a godere colla smania con cui vediamo sulla scena un
affamato gettarsi sur un pasticcio.

di simpatia, d’amore, di stima, di intime compiacenze della vita di
famiglia — non era a discorrersi neanche per baja.

se avesse potuto sposar giulio quando la sua fede in sè e in lui era
intiera, l’amore le avrebbe dato quei principj, quelle convinzioni che
occorrono per una donna di famiglia — perchè una donna innamorata è
capace di tutto e, non persino, ma principalmente d’essere onesta.

ma l’amore essendole stato strappato dal seno, di sorpresa, con tanta
violenza, ella rimase come.... senza un viscere, eppur viva.

ella non fu più una donna. coll’amore aveva perduto ogni senso morale,
ciò che si chiama cuore — e, quel ch’è peggio, senza alcuna speranza di
riacquistare nè l’uno nè l’altro.

dunque: marito ricco e godere.

e per disgrazia, minelli, invece di frenarla, si associò a lei a
lavorare per la comune rovina. egli, che durante tutta la sua vita non
aveva dato prove che d’energia e di buon senso — trasportato dalla
sua folle passione, non diede, dopo le seconde nozze, che prove dì
debolezza e di stoltezza.

nonchè rifiutare.... offriva. — anche le cose a cui maddalena sarebbe
stata indifferente, quasi quasi venivano da lui imposte.

«oggi faremo» — «domani andremo» — «ecco cosa t’ho comperato....» e
così via.

non v’era da desiderare. era già fatto.

niente di meglio per maddalena. abiti, giojelli a profusione, gite di
piacere, teatri, cene, pranzi, e tutto senza posa al punto che doveva
essere un faticare piuttosto che un godere.

la casa, che durante il primo matrimonio era arredata con una
semplicità quasi campagnuola — vi si vedeva il puro indispensabile e
tutta roba di gusto più che tramontato — ora pareva un _bazar_. e il
cambiar il vecchio in nuovo aveva costato quindicimila lire.

il ragioniere del signor minelli vedeva con spavento questo scialacquo
crescente, e arrischiava talora una timida osservazione.... minelli
ascoltava, gonfiava le gote, poi si passava una mano sulla fronte....
e le cose continuavano sempre sullo stesso piede — il che vuol dire
sempre in peggio, perchè le rendite non aumentavano e non si faceva che
consumar capitale.

il ragioniere, vedendo l’inutilità delle sue premure, tacque,
lusingandosi che, quando alla chiusura del bilancio sarebbe risultato
il guasto profondo fatto da tante follie nella situazione della casa,
il signor minelli avrebbe fatto senno.

ma s’ingannò. minelli vide, fu malcontento, disse che bisognava fare,
che bisognava dire, che sperava anni migliori pel seguito.... ma che
quanto alle spese di casa era difficile ridurle.... però avrebbe fatto
il possibile. si capisce subito che non fece niente. la solita storia.
non v’è alcuno di quelli che si rovinano, che non lo sappiano di
rovinarsi, eppure nessuno sa fermarsi a tempo e salvarsi. in che cosa
mai sperano?

un fatto che avrebbe dovuto avere le più benefiche conseguenze per casa
minelli, fu invece una cagione di nuove spese, e nulla più. vogliamo
parlare del giorno in cui maddalena mise alla luce una figlia.

allora si vide alcun che di stranissimo in quella casa. si festeggiò
la nascita con un ricevimento, in cui, fra confetti e vini di lusso, si
consumò in poche ore un capitale, si fecero brindisi innumerevoli alla
neonata, alla puerpera, vi furono dei versi sulle gioje della famiglia,
vi furono complimenti, abbracciamenti e baciucchiamenti senza fine per
il papà, per l’avventurata mamma, che il cielo aveva benedetti subito
regolarmente.... e poi, buona notte! l’indomani si mise la bambina
sulle braccia della nutrice, che partì, e non si parlò più di figlia nè
di gioje della famiglia, come se nulla fosse nato....!

le varietà del genere _madre_ sono infinite.

accenneremo solo delle seguenti:

vi sono delle madri-nate che amerebbero i proprj figli anche se il
padre fosse la creatura più odiosa, anche se egli si fosse sottratto
colla fuga a qualsiasi responsabilità. — vi sono delle donne che amano
i figli, perchè amano il marito — altre che si rassegnano a mantenerli,
perchè non si è potuto non averli e li educano perchè un giorno «ne
porteranno in casa» — altre infine che odiano la loro prole. queste
ultime non sono donne, sono.... cimici.

maddalena fu estremamente seccata quando sentì d’essere madre. «perchè
avere dei figli?» si diceva. nelle disposizioni in cui aveva preso
marito, e tutta simulazione e affettazione nelle sue tenerezze per
quell’uomo, del quale una sola cosa le premeva — «che spendesse per
lei» — ella non vedeva a cosa potessero servire dei figli.

l’istinto materno aveva forse esistito in lei, ma in tal caso era
stato ucciso in germe insieme all’amore per giulio. così ella era madre
come un bruto qualunque, anzi peggio, perchè aveva generato contro la
sua volontà. questo non lo disse per convenienza, ma lo fece capire
quando dichiarò al marito che «non ne voleva più.» ella voleva essere
libera. ecco perchè, battezzata la figlia, la mandò alla campagna e ben
lontano.

il marito diceva qualche volta: «andiamo a trovare la nostra silvia»
— «sì.... andremo», rispondeva maddalena, ma non si andava mai. non
è a credere però che proprio nessuno pensasse alla povera silvia. oh!
ci pensavano i papetti, che di tanto in tanto montavano in diligenza
e facevano le loro brave quaranta miglia per andar ad abbracciare la
bambina....

ritornavano poi a dire cose meravigliose della sua bellezza e del suo
spirito.... ma non sgelavano nulla. padre e madre avevano ben altro a
fare, come stiamo per vedere.

                                 * * *

si può farne a meno dell’amore, nella vita, quando si hanno delle
ragioni per non volerne sapere, ma non si può trovare bella e neanche
sopportabile la propria casa se l’amore non vi regna.

maddalena s’annojò tanto della casa conjugale negli ultimi mesi della
gestazione, che si propose, non appena avesse riacquistata la primiera
libertà di movimenti, di stare in casa il meno possibile.

e tenne, e la prima cosa che volle, tosto che potè uscire, fu non
pranzar più a domicilio. — il marito sulle prime non ne voleva sapere,
poi cedette a malincuore, infine si abituò al nuovo genere di vita e fu
contento come di tutto il resto.

questa innovazione malaugurata ebbe le più funeste conseguenze.

primo, la casa da quel momento fu casa.... di nome. non v’era attaccato
più niente. casa volle dire solo: luogo dove si sta a dormire.

secondo, il marito, che già nei primi mesi della seconda unione aveva
perduto alquanto della sua diligenza e attività — quando si prese
l’abitudine di pranzar fuori, a poco a poco finì col trascurar del
tutto i suoi interessi, perchè da principio si stava all’osteria un
pajo d’ore, e poi si arrivò a passarvi tutta la sera e quindi anche
parte della notte. si giunse al punto che il tempo bastava appena per
smaltire a letto e per riempirsi di nuovo.

un’abitudine poi ne genera delle altre, e, colle molte amicizie di
buontemponi che la vita all’osteria procurò a minelli, egli prese
insensibilmente anche l’abitudine ai liquori e specialmente al
terribile _absinthe_.

dopo pochi mesi di tal disordinare, non si riconosceva più in minelli
l’uomo una volta robusto e pieno di vitalità. già era cominciata
quell’incuria di sè stesso così propria della gente dedita al bere.
la barba incolta e brizzolata, gli abiti sempre gualciti, scuciti,
unti....; non si vedeva mai quando eran nuovi. gli occhi imbambolati,
la persona accasciata, incapace di celeri movimenti. solo quando aveva
trangugiato una dozzina di bicchierini di quelle infernali bevande....
aveva dei sussulti galvanici. egli pareva rianimarsi allora, ma tosto
cascava addormentato col volto di tutti i colori. risvegliatosi,
ricominciava per riaver qualche spirito.... e tosto ricadere.

— perchè bevi così, minelli? — gli diceva alle volte qualche amico,
dolente di vederlo compiere un lento suicidio.

— bevo.... per mettermi in forza.... e per dimenticare.

— che cosa dimenticare? i tuoi affari vanno a gonfie vele, tua moglie
ti vuol bene.

— sì, è vero, ma ho bisogno di dimenticare.... capisci....? bisogna
essere qui.... qui nel cuore! —

nessuno ci capiva nulla, per cui si cominciò a dire che il povero
minelli andava impazzando.

che cosa mai aveva bisogno di dimenticare?

eh! aveva bisogno di dimenticare la sua miseria fisica e morale, non
voleva vedere il dissesto de’ suoi affari, non voleva vedere la sua
imbecillità.

egli voleva vedere una cosa sola.... sua moglie.... e sempre più
cresceva la sua passione per lei, perchè ella diveniva sempre più
magnifica. la vita dell’osteria le si confaceva!

la chiamavan già la «minella dalle belle spalle.»

aveva il volto freschissimo della prima gioventù e l’opulenza di
forme dei trent’anni. era una di quelle bellezze che quando passano vi
strappano una bestemmia.

e maddalena, colla sua influenza, avrebbe potuto salvare minelli.
perchè non lo fece?

un giorno il padre e la madre le dissero:

— guarda che tuo marito beve troppo.... lo dicono tutti.

— è un’esagerazione.... — rispose.

— guarda che gli farà male....

— ma che!

— ma sì, quando si bevono tanti liquori, si muore abbruciati.... bel
gusto sarebbe per te restar vedova così giovine. —

a queste parole ella ebbe un sorriso sinistro.... e scrollò le spalle.

nero abisso in cui non vogliamo nemmeno lasciar cadere uno sguardo.

                                 * * *

intanto il tarlo continuava il suo lavoro nella fortuna del merciajo.

la voce della sua negligenza, del suo dilapidare s’era sparsa — e,
nonostante gli sforzi del suo ragioniere, l’avviamento della sua
bottega ne soffriva. tutti prima erano abituati a vedere il minelli,
ed ora il minelli non c’era mai o quasi — e quando c’era, pareva
stupido. gli avventori si stancavano. ad aggravare il male, s’aggiunse
una nuova piaga.... i giovani di negozio cominciarono a fare quel tal
mestiere.... cosicchè spesso avveniva che certi _articoli_, i quali non
erano mai stati venduti, non si trovassero più. perchè? ma come? chi
è stato? il ragioniere sbuffava, sgridava.... ma l’occhio e il braccio
del padrone mancavano e non c’era rimedio possibile.

                                 * * *

e che faceva maddalena?

un primo amore da ridere aveva fatto di lei una moglie, e quindi una
madre per ridere. che le restava a fare? — ridere. — qual miglior modo
di divertirsi, che studiare quel mondo per lei affatto nuovo in cui
s’era trovata sbalestrata, quasi d’improvviso?

quanto gliene aveva detto severina era poco in confronto della vasta
scienza, e l’aveva messa in viva curiosità di imparare il resto.
d’altronde, avesse anche severina potuto dirle tutto, altro è viaggiare
sui volumi dei viaggiatori, e altro è viaggiare colle proprie gambe....
toccare e vedere.

in poco tempo ne toccò e ne vide tante che il suo cervello ne fu
profondamente guasto. vi sono degli individui che passano in mezzo a
tutte le immondezze e ai delitti senza soffrirne altro che un po’ di
noja alla vista e all’olfatto — vi son altri invece cui l’immondezza
e il delitto seducono, e non hanno ancor finito di vedere che già
sono immondezza essi medesimi o rei. — altri infine si divertono e
imparano.... pel momento.... salvo poi il far più o meno loro pro di
quanto hanno appreso — a norma delle circostanze.

maddalena era di questi ultimi.

vedere, pigliar un gusto matto a studiare, a scoprire — e tener a mente.

e davvero aveva ragione di pigliarsi gusto. nella sua posizione e colle
numerose amicizie d’ambo i sessi, di cui il matrimonio e la vita nuova
l’avevano circondata, ella poteva veder chiaro in tutto questo amalgama
stranissimo che si chiama «società,» niuna classe esclusa.

l’osteria è una specie di lavatojo, in cui si mettono in evidenza tutte
le macchie della città e della provincia.

non si smacchia mai nulla, è vero — ma in compenso, si scopron delle
macchie anche dove non ve ne sono.

minelli aveva cominciato dall’esser solo colla moglie all’osteria,
poi vi si era aggiunto qualche amico, poi gli amici degli amici, in
modo che in poche settimane la sala o il _berceau_, sotto il quale, a
seconda del tempo, si pranzava, bastava appena per «minelli e compagnia
bella.»

fino alla frutta, di solito, tanto più se v’era qualche faccia nuova,
si conservava la bussola, si discorreva di cose di famiglia, di affari,
di politica, specialmente estera, perchè più facile, ecc., ecc., — poi,
a poco a poco, colle libazioni, il termometro saliva e veniva il resto,
il vero condimento del pranzo, la più gradita droga, il coronamento
dell’edificio, venivano cioè i discorsi lubrici.

si cominciava dai doppj sensi, poi si passava ai sensi semplicissimi,
e quindi si mettevano sul tappeto la vita materiale conjugale e le
questioni analoghe in tutta la loro crudezza.

l’imprudenza dell’uno provocava l’accusa o le giustificazioni
dell’altro. si udivano certi rimproveri che avrebbero fatto
arrossire.... un frate.... forse.... si davano dei consigli che
avrebbero ispirato ad un legislatore, delle aggiunte al codice penale.
si facevano dei paralleli.... a cui la storia era affatto estranea, ma
che commovevano — v’erano delle liriche ad un dio che nell’antichità si
vedeva da per tutto, e che ora si tien celato per render più saporito
il suo regno.... perchè egli impera sempre.... oh! sì — v’era.....
v’era insomma la morale come veramente la intende il mondo.

un marito, mostrando sua moglie, diceva: ecco il mio _sacramento_ —
una moglie, parlando del marito assente, diceva: oggi non c’è il mio
_matri_...., cercate fra i _moccoli_ la finale.... quanto a noi non la
scriviamo. l’amor conjugale si assicurava non esser possibile perchè
_è sempre quella minestra_. i figli, un imbarazzo che fanno diventar
brutta la donna e tolgono gli agi alla casa, anzi, precisamente che
impediscono di berne un bicchier di più.

le mogli devono essere tanti mobili. i mariti sono copertoni,
ecc. poi venivano le storielle dei barcajuoli, dei curati, dei
frati, delle monache, e si discorreva dei _porti di mare_ e delle
_famiglie-alberghi_, dove non si arriva mai tardi e si alloggia sempre
bene. il tutto accompagnato da commenti, discussioni, miglioramenti di
testo....

v’erano dei momenti in cui si credeva di essere proprio.... in questo
mondo.

e la società non era cattiva, vedete.

era quella che si trova.... da per tutto.

v’era minelli, dunque, e altri merciaj. v’eran dei commissionarj, v’era
un parrucchiere _de la haute_, come diceva lui — un calzolajo del gran
_chic_.... per sua sventura, assicurava — un sarto molto ganimede
e ballante a cinquant’anni — v’eran degli impiegati senz’ordine e
con meno concetto, ecc., ecc., e v’erano, s’intende, le rispettive
consorti.

nei giorni festivi, poi, la società era numerosissima. venivan parenti
ed altri amici, fra i quali delle vecchie zitelle che non capivan mai
niente, e parlavan del loro gatto — delle vecchie vedove, e anche delle
maritate, che si facevan capire senza fatica — dei fanciulli d’ambo
i sessi, delle ragazze sboccianti, e delle ragazze già sbocciate alla
ricerca.... delle api.

v’eran dei giovani di primo, secondo e terzo pelo, che cercavano e
trovavano anche dei sollievi alle pene d’ogni età.

prudenza non ve n’era mai troppa, ma quando i bambini morti di sonno
s’abbandonavano sulla tavola, e le sboccianti insieme a piccoli
tulipani di dodici, tredici anni vagavano fra le ombre a coglier
lucciole, e le sbocciate romanticamente passeggiavano in un vialetto
dove trovavan sempre qualche furtiva stretta.... di mano — allora nel
grosso della compagnia composta di gente spregiudicata, o, come dicasi,
«di mondo....» si alzava la gran cateratta e si dava la fuga alle
acque.... ah! ah! che orgia spirituale!

quanti argomenti saltavano in scena che di solito sono roba da medici
e da confessori! — quante confidenze in un orecchio.... che tutti
udivano! — quante proposte a bruciapelo accolte con schiaffi....
corretti da sorrisi. — e le vecchie e grasse comari, crivelli disusati,
avvinazzate, colle labbra grosse e nere pel bere, le guance pavonazze,
come se la godevano, come si scompisciavano dalle risa, asciugandosi
poi le lagrime della consolazione! quanti altarini non si scoprivano!
— e il marito della tale era innamorato della fantesca, alla quale
portava il caffè la mattina, mentre era ancora a letto. — e la moglie
del tale aveva.... non occorre dir cosa.... — e il lusso di questa
costava tanto e tanto. — e quella buona massaja che aveva fatto la
fortuna di suo marito.... colla sola e dolce fatica di qualche sospiro!
— e quei due marito e moglie, che erano sempre in tre, al teatro, al
caffè, all’albergo.... a spese non del marito! — e quella bella signora
che si vedeva sempre così e colà, e che facendosi condurre al caffè dal
suo favorito, per non farlo sfigurare al momento di pagare, gli faceva
passare di sotto il tavolino il suo portamonete! — un mercante diceva
delle raccomandazioni di certe signore, le quali non vogliono che il
marito veda tutto il conto: «soltanto questo e questo e questo, gli
faccia vedere.... il resto lo pagherò poi io!! — ih! ih! ih! faceva il
coro. —

ma e la bella moglie di quel tal impiegato che lasciava i suoi ritratti
presso varie _buone conoscenze_, le quali, si incaricavano di far
nascere la ricerca dell’originale! — e non è la sola!.... gridava
taluno — io ho visto degli _album_! — oh! bello! oh! bello! — rigridava
il coro.

e naturalmente v’era gran varietà di soggetti. non si limitavano alle
cose.... allegre. v’erano anche le tristi. si parlava degli odj di
questa e di quella famiglia — del tal tentativo d’avvelenamento — di
certe enormezze incomprensibili — di usure inaudite — di ruberie a man
salva — di crudeltà consumate fra le mure domestiche — di infamie senza
nome — di mariti che trascurano e peggio moglie e figli, e si fanno
rovinare di borsa e di salute fuori di casa — di mogli che.... fanno
altrettanto....

ma alfine bisognava pur muoversi e andarsene a casa. bello spettacolo
quella marcia notturna! pareva la ritirata da mosca. andavano a due, a
tre, a quattro, a uno.... chi barcollava, chi s’appoggiava al muro, chi
correva, chi cantava.... tutto. — chi urlava, chi bestemmiava.... or
non si trovava più questo.... or non si vedeva più quella. le ragazze
erano sempre davanti, molto davanti.... e mezzo stordite da un po’ di
vino e dalla veglia ascoltavan commosse le prime dolcezze e facevano
imprudentemente le prime concessioni.

qualche moglie aveva suo marito indietro.... e intanto difendevasi
da qualche conquistatore.... ma difendevasi male.... e qualche volta,
nell’addio, v’era anche una non sempre tacita promessa.

passando vicino a qualche coppia si udivano dei rimproveri.... e
guardandoli in faccia non si poteva dire avessero delle ragioni legali
per farsene.

intanto la sparpagliata comitiva andava.... andava.

chi entrava di qua, chi prendeva di là.... finchè restavano soli tre o
quattro molto cotti... che noi non seguiremo certo.

e le cose finivano forse là?

l’indomani cominciava la cronaca della notte. un marito aveva battuto
la moglie — una moglie aveva battuto il marito — un marito aveva
costretta la moglie a fare, in camicia, il maneggio del fucile — un
fanciullo s’era rotto la testa — un giovinetto aveva sbagliato di piano
— .... un altro, di uscio, in casa propria — i tali erano così poco
ubbriachi che, dopo molte vicende notturne, ora erano tutti a letto
ammalati....

a lungo andare, in una compagnia come quella, raccogliticcia, senza
scelta, messa insieme proprio a casaccio, non potevan non nascere
intrighi, imbrogli d’ogni genere e se di quel che avvenne non si può
parlare per non mormorare del prossimo, si può dire però che vi furono
scene di gelosia — che vi furono ire di genitori.... mariti e parenti
ingenui, i quali lasciavan ber smoderatamente mogli e fanciulle....
come se il vino potesse produrre nella donna effetti differenti da
quelli che produce nell’uomo!

il solo che non diceva mai niente nè di nè a sua moglie era il buon
minelli, il quale anzi la incoraggiava a bere, perchè quando ella aveva
il viso acceso e gli occhi, grazie a bacco, più brillanti — gli occhi
di lui del pari alterati dal vino la trovavano ancor più affascinante.

forse minelli avrebbe rinunciato a compiacenze di tal genere, se il
liquido avesse fatto commettere delle sciocchezze a maddalena, ma ella
era sempre la «tosa di bronzo» — non obbediva al vino, lo dominava.
tanto è vero che in sei mesi, neppure la più piccola imprudenza si
poteva rimproverarle.

ella si teneva sempre vicina al marito, sorrideva e rideva alle
licenze poetiche di tutti.... ma anche sollecitata non apportava il
suo contingente. non era in pubblico ch’ella amava prodursi. oh! nella
conversazione intima con qualche amica, era un altro pajo di maniche.

allora ella diceva delle cose gustosissime.

ma all’osteria, fra i fumi del vino e dello zigaro, quando si era
perduta ogni misura, esporsi come gli altri le pareva triviale.
l’immoralità le piaceva, ma piccante, di buon gusto, fina insomma.
l’allieva di severina non poteva essere che così.

avvicinandosi l’inverno, maddalena pensava seriamente a quello che
farebbe in carnevale. nel carnevale precedente non aveva potuto
ballare, a motivo della gravidanza — ma si ricordava d’aver giurato
allora a sè stessa di compensarsene ad usura nel prossimo inverno. però
il mendicare inviti o il ballare nei teatri non le garbava punto.

una cosa che le avrebbe molto piaciuto sarebbe stato il dar delle feste
in casa sua — ma l’angustia relativa dell’appartamento non permetteva
di pensarvi. ed ella voleva divertirsi, ballare, e godere uno splendido
carnevale, senza noje, proprio colla perfetta libertà di cui avrebbe
fruito in casa. come fare? — subito fatto.

una sera minelli — suggeritrice la moglie — disse che la compagnia era
tanto buona che sarebbe stato un vero peccato il lasciarla disperdersi
nell’inverno.

gli pareva che, essendo tanto numerosa, si potesse benissimo costituire
in società per dare delle feste da ballo a sè stessa dal primo dicembre
alla fine del carnevale.

maddalena aveva pensato e suggerito bene. il progetto di minelli fu
ricevuto con acclamazioni generali.

otto giorni dopo la società era costituita e lo statuto, steso da
un socio pratico di simili faccende, approvato e firmato. minelli fu
eletto, per riconoscenza, presidente; la società, in omaggio al gentil
sesso, fu denominata: _delle belle donne_, e il primo dicembre si
apersero le sale, con tripudio generale.




si ballava tre volte la settimana alla _società delle belle donne_. il
martedì e il giovedì, la veglia non si protraeva però oltre il tocco.
il sabato solo, la festa durava fino all’alba vegnente.

maddalena nelle prime feste si abbandonò con tutta la foga della sua
gioventù e robustezza in preda alla molteplice voluttà di turbinare
fra due braccia d’uomo a suon d’orchestra. nuova voluttà per lei,
chè da quando aveva lasciato la scuola non aveva più mosso piede.
era instancabile e stancava tutti. eppure non era più pesante di una
piuma.... quando danzava.

ma in capo a qualche settimana parve annoiarsi di quel trottolare. non
aveva affatto estinto quella smania nel sangue di un moto continuo
e vertiginoso, ma siccome, man mano la stagione inoltrava, le feste
si facevan sempre più affollate, si finiva a ballare tutt’al più due
minuti ogni mezz’ora e a passar il resto in processione attraverso le
sale, sospirando, talora invano, altri due minuti — il che per lei era
ultra nojoso. non avendo delle ragioni particolari per ballare ad ogni
costo, preferiva ritirarsi, con qualche amica, nel salotto giallo,
riservato appunto alla conversazione delle signore, e che maddalena
chiamava la sua oasi. infatti, essendo l’ultima delle sale sociali
ed avendo l’ingresso difeso da una spessa portiera, vi si godeva una
frescura, una quiete, un silenzio ch’erano un vero ristoro per chi
veniva dalle torride sale in cui ferveva la danza.

là su quelle poltroncine presso quel tenue fuoco che scoppiettava
nel caminetto, coll’accompagnamento della sordina del gas, nasceva
spontanea la conversazione e si sentiva il bisogno delle confidenze.

ma è difficile che alle signore, tanto più se belle, venga fatto di
restar sole.... oltrechè la donna ha.... non sappiamo cos’ha.... ma
qualche cosa ha certo che attira l’uomo sulle sue orme, quel ritrarsi
così in disparte non poteva non destare sospetti e curiosità nei
signori uomini, che invasero ben presto il salotto giallo. sulle
prime quelle signore n’ebbero stizza, ma dopo ci pigliarono diletto.
la conversazione di molte gentili persone dei due sessi, che avevano
a pensar solo a darsi buon tempo, se non era più intima, diveniva
certamente più animata ed arguta.

nel salotto giallo si formavano dei gruppi e si scherzava amabilmente.
v’era un gruppo però che la vinceva sugli altri per numero e brio —
quello della presidentessa. ella aveva saputo attorniarsi delle donne
più sapienti e degli uomini più scettici e più caustici.

all’intorno, come spettatori, v’era una schiera di giovinetti del
primo corso di galanteria, i quali non dicevano niente per rispetto
ai maestri, e che, con quei loro colli torti per l’attenzione e lo
stupore, e con quei visi imberbi senz’altra espressione fuor quella
delle cravattine bianche, facevan l’effetto delle foglie incurate che
circondano un mazzo di fiori.

quanti frizzi! quanti razzi! quante scoperte filosofiche e anche
geografiche!

ma ad alta voce si diceva quel che si può dire in una festa da ballo ad
alta voce. quel che si usa dire a bassa voce non lo si diceva che dopo
cena, il sabato, fra quei quattro o cinque signori e signore dei più
matricolati.... nessun marito presente. allora si diceva l’indicibile
con una grazia, un sapore, un buon gusto, che avrebbero deliziato
fiammetta.... quello era il campo d’azione di maddalena.... ma noi non
possiamo, sgraziatamente, entrar in particolari, perchè erano tutta
gente discreta e non divulgavan nulla, nemmeno una parola!

                                 * * *

si dice: _per ballare_, ma realmente le società che si costituiscono
per ballare, si costituiscono _per amare_.

non sofistichiamo sulla parola, che è molto elastica, e può significare
tutto quello che si vuole, e conveniamo che non può essere che
così. come, infatti, supporre che gente bella, giovane, ardente, di
vario sesso, se ne stia insieme di frequente, per molte ore, volando
abbracciata, mangiando, bevendo, ridendo, discorrendo, in un’atmosfera
torrida, profumata.... godendo di tutte le voluttà dei cinque sensi,
— senza che l’anima prenda un po’ parte alle ebbrezze del corpo? ora,
quando l’anima, ossia questo complesso di fantasia e di cuore, viene
riscaldata dalle fiammelle che si svolgono dagli spiriti accesi della
materia.... la prima cosa che fa: è _amare_. preghiamo nuovamente di
non sofisticare.

noi abbiamo tanto buona opinione della umanità, da assicurare che
riunendo a caso uomini e donne che non si sono mai veduti, e facendoli
mangiare, bere e ballare, dopo un’ora — qualche coppia anche più presto
— parleranno d’amore, e quindi.... dunque è naturale che lo stesso
avvenisse nella _società delle belle donne_ e con minore difficoltà,
perchè, meno un certo numero di socj nuovi, tutti i membri si
conoscevano, come sappiamo, da tempo — e perchè, qualche vincolo più o
meno poetico già esisteva o era desiato.

il romanzo di alcune giovinette continuò colla speranza del _buon_
scioglimento, ossia conclusione — cominciò quello di altre — alcune
signore ancor oscillanti si decisero — altre che s’erano già decise
prima, mutarono avviso — questo non vuol dir che si pentirono! — altre,
invece, replicando una volta ancora la prova del fuoco, ne uscirono
illese, colla coscienza tranquilla, ma sospirose. quanto a maddalena,
lo si sapeva che non era una donna facile, ma non si credeva poi
che fosse una virtù di ferro, come mostrò di essere in mezzo a tante
seduzioni. i giovani più abili e fortunati in fatto di galanteria,
tentarono l’assalto.... e furono tutti sconfitti da’ suoi sorrisi
beffardi.

nè le adulazioni, nè i sospiri, nè le offerte.... di un’anima! ecc....,
nulla le fece impressione. tanti bellissimi giovani.... e nessuno fu
tanto avventurato da farle ripetere quelle famose parole: «eccolo.... è
lui!»

tale inqualificabile indifferenza sorprendeva i respinti, i quali,
pratici nel fare i conti sulle esigenze del sangue delle donne e sulle
solvibilità dei mariti, trovavano che ella avrebbe dovuto essere molto
esigente, perchè v’era poca solvibilità — ma era forza accontentarsi di
sorprendersi.

se però maddalena si mostrava indifferente per tutti i suddetti, non
mancava di divertirsi a suo modo. il suo modo era quello di farsi
fare la corte dai giovinetti.... ella godeva mezzo mondo vedendo i
loro ansiosi sguardi frugarla da per tutto, godeva destando sfrenati
desiderj, ch’ella incoraggiava con occhiate magnetiche e con parole
equivoche.... per poi.... udita una timida dichiarazione, liberarsi
con uno scoppio di riso.... o con un consiglio materno, che li faceva
diventar rossi rossi, sudare, fuggire.

ma nessuno sapeva nulla di nessuno, perchè nessuno aveva.... alcun che
di buono a dire — e così maddalena, alla sua età, passava per una donna
superiore, e minelli pel marito più invidiabile.

ed ella stessa si credeva invulnerabile, perchè insensibile, ed era
certa di poter continuare sempre a burlarsi degli uomini e a ridere
delle debolezze delle donne.

ma invulnerabile ed insensibile non voglion dire inaccessibile!

maddalena faceva i conti senza l’imprevedibile e specialmente senza sè
stessa.

questo parrà strano, ma se fosse così, lo si vedrà.

                                 * * *

una sera, dopo i primi valzer, in quel momento di confusione che nasce
in una sala da ballo allo svanir dell’ultima battuta, maddalena sentì
toccarsi il braccio. era un’amica che, con una delle solite smorfie:

— _chérie_ — le disse — c’è qui il signor soranzi, che desidera tanto
l’onore di conoscerti.

— oh! l’onore è mio.... — rispose con accento di sorpresa
maddalena, rivolgendosi e squadrando il giovine che s’inchinava
muto e arrossente.... quando egli rilevò la fronte, e i loro occhi
s’incontrarono, un sorriso benevolo, quale di rado ella ne aveva per
gli uomini, le spuntò, e naturale, quasi affettuosa, continuò:

— non siamo conoscenze nuove.... mi pare.

— allora io sono perfettamente inutile qui — disse l’amica, ridendo —
ma.... mi raccomando! — e senz’attender altro li lasciò.

— perchè vi siete fatto presentare....? — fe’ maddalena, posando la
mano sul di lui braccio e segnandogli con un gesto grazioso la via da
tenersi.

— era incerto sull’accoglienza che avreste potuto farmi.

— che cosa temevate.... da una povera donna?

— temeva che, a motivo di un certo incidente della mia vita.... mi
aveste mal giudicato e quindi tenuto il broncio.

— oh!.... che idea!

— se vi foste ritenuta offesa, però, n’avreste avuto tutte le
ragioni.... benchè io possa pienamente giustificarmi.

— perchè doveva offendermi?

— ma.... scusate — fece oreste con sorriso stentato — quale effetto
produsse in voi....?

— nessuno.... cosa volevate mai che sentissi? mi arriva una lettera
inattesa.... in cui un signore, che, sotto tutti i rapporti, io era ben
lontana dall’imaginare potesse occuparsi di me, mi dice che....

— che vi ama!

— sì.... al tempo imperfetto.... adesso è imperfetto.... già! sss....
ora parlo io.... ecco la mia oasi, sediamo qui, se non vi spiace. ma
forse voi avete degli _impegni_, chi sa quante signore vi aspettano con
impazienza....

— nessuna m’aspetta, perchè io sono venuto solo per voi....

— ah! ah! ah!

— non credete?

— credo.... credo.... torniamo al nostro discorso.... che vi diceva?
ah! dunque.... ricevo una lettera inattesa....; mio padre la prende e
va per sapere se quello che c’è scritto sta bene — gli rispondono che
sta male.... cosa volete mai che pensi io?.... penso che chi ha scritto
è stato un po’.... troppo giovine.... e buona notte! tutto è avvenuto
così telegraficamente che non ha lasciato traccia.... davvero, m’è
parso un gioco di prestigio. eccolo qua.... marcia, sparisci.... non
c’è più! ah! ah!

— nemmeno una punta di rammarico....?

— ora non posso dirvi nè sì nè no. se vi dico che la punta c’era....
faccio torto a mio marito.... se vi dico che non c’era.... vi
dispiace.... vedete quindi.... —

il giovine stette qualche momento sopra pensiero e mesto, poi mormorò:

— pensare che per pochi mesi soltanto vi ho perduta per sempre!

— non capisco.... ma forse è meglio.... e a che gioverebbe poi
capire?.... ritorniamo in sala?

— no, lasciatemi dirvi solo questo..... ho bisogno d’essere
perfettamente giustificato ai vostri occhi..... via, siate buona,
vi chiedo così poco! — quando io vi scrissi quella lettera....
credetelo.... io vi amava perdutamente.... è inutile che io vi
riferisca la scena violenta che ebbi con mio padre... potete
imaginarvela... dovetti cedere! e come non cedere, quando egli minacciò
di rinnegarmi piuttosto che riconoscervi per mia moglie?

— ah! è lusinghiero per me! — disse gajamente maddalena.

— non dovete offendervene.... ogni padre ha le sue idee fisse e non
crede alla bontà delle idee dei figli, i quali, secondo i genitori,
mancano sempre d’esperienza quando vogliono agire per impulso di cuore.
— il suo rifiuto, del resto, non implicava una opinione sfavorevole a
vostro riguardo.

— voglio ben crederlo.

— ah! sì, credetelo.... tanto è vero.... ma questo ve lo dirò dopo.
— m’era proibito di allontanarmi dall’università.... ero angustiato
dagli studj.... non potei fare alcun passo verso di voi. d’altronde,
dopo quel colpo di testa che doveva parervi ben ridicolo, come avere il
coraggio di farsi vedere? — erano scorsi pochi giorni, quando mio padre
mi diede la notizia del vostro prossimo matrimonio.... non vi dico che
ho pianto.... perchè ridereste.... —

la voce d’oreste, già tremolante, si spense, ed egli chinò il capo
vergognando della sua debolezza. il suo racconto era stato detto con
un accento così ingenuo e sincero, che maddalena quasi per sorpresa
ne era stata interessata, e quando lo vide come avvilito, gli disse
cordialmente, per toglierlo d’imbarazzo:

— e come mai non vi ho più veduto in tutto questo tempo?

— se non aveste preso marito, io, finiti gli studj, avrei fatto tutti
gli sforzi per piegare la volontà di mio padre. e vi sarei riuscito.
avevo il mio progetto e buono! anche un figlio può minacciare.... basta
la minaccia di perdersi! ma quando seppi che vi maritavate... ricevetti
tal colpo che durai fatica a rimettermi un po’ d’ordine nel cervello.
senza l’incubo dell’ultima prova all’università.... che per me voleva
dire onore o ridicolo eterno.... non so che avrei fatto! potete pensare
se, finiti gli studj, pensassi pure a toccare questa città.... viaggiai
qualche mese. quindi, allorchè bisognò pensare al ritorno, tremando
all’idea di rivedervi dalle mie finestre, felice con un altro, e di
essere un oggetto di derisione per voi....

— via....

— scrissi a mio padre che desideravo si traslocasse....

— ah! ecco il perchè....

— sì.... abbiamo una casa presso la stazione, siamo andati ad abitar
là. ma allora, quando tornai, sentii subito che non bastava.... era
ancor troppo vicino a voi.... e dissi che voleva passar l’inverno in
campagna. i miei genitori mi seguirono.... essi comprendevano molto
bene lo stato dell’animo mio. dopo l’inverno, venne la primavera....
seguì l’estate.... e nessuno pensava a ritornare, quando una sventura
ci obbligò a lasciar la campagna. mio padre, che soffriva, già da
qualche anno, d’oftalmia, per un aggravamento improvviso, correva
pericolo di restar cieco.... si tornò quindi in città per aver a nostra
disposizione i migliori professori.... ma tutte le cure possibili
giovarono a nulla....

— cieco?

— non precisamente, ma la sua vista è affievolita in modo che non può
occuparsi di niente. ora, tutti gli interessi di casa sono affidati
a me. quel che volevo dirvi poc’anzi è questo: ora che mio padre è
ridotto in così triste stato.... è un altro uomo. mentre, prima, mi
ha sempre distolto da ogni idea conjugale, ora egli vorrebbe che io
prendessi moglie, perchè sente che il chiasso e le carezze dei bambini
sarebbero per lui un immenso conforto. non è egli vero che se voi oggi
foste ancora libera, io potrei farvi mia ed appagare il vivo desiderio
di mio padre?

— ma egli m’ha rifiutata una volta per ragioni d’interesse.... e mi
rifiuterebbe ancora.

— non v’ho detto ch’è un altro uomo adesso? basti dirvi che un giorno
in cui mi pregava appunto di prender moglie, avendogli io risposto: —
perchè non me l’hai lasciata prendere allora.... saremmo tutti felici!
— ma! sospirò.... allora non prevedeva.... e poi era così persuaso che
il tuo amore fosse un puro capriccio giovanile, che ho voluto salvarti
da un tardo pentimento. — e se adesso potessi ancora sposarla? — è un
discorso inutile questo.... ma se tu trovi una brava ragazza.... sia
anche senza un soldo.... purchè piaccia a te, sposala! — non vi pare,
maddalena, che questo sia parlar chiaro?

— sì — fe’ maddalena ridendo — ma, come dice vostro padre, adesso sono
discorsi inutili. — ora ditemi un po’, come mai vi trovate su questa
festa?

— il marito della signora che mi ha presentato è mio amico. l’altra
sera discorrendosi, al caffè, del carnevale, mi ha invitato ad
_onorare_ queste feste!.... — ci sono belle donne?.... ho domandato
ridendo. — diavolo, è la _società delle belle donne_! abbiamo.... mia
moglie.... abbiamo la signora minelli.... — non bastava sapere che
v’eravate voi....?

— non era una ragione.

— ma diventò una ragione quando mi disse che dopo il vostro
matrimonio eravate divenuta ancor più bella. siccome questo mi pareva
impossibile.... ho voluto accertarmene.

— ah! ah! non vi domando se è vero.

— perchè lo sapete.... sentite, maddalena!

— sss! — ecco mio marito. — paolo.... — continuò rivolta a lui che
entrava, facendogli cenno d’avvicinarsi.

minelli andò a lei lentamente.... e oreste lo guardava con dolorosa
sorpresa — non lo raffigurava più.

le lunghe, troppo frequenti veglie e i nuovi disordini del carnevale
avevano dato un forte crollo al disgraziato. sembrava un cencio. curvo,
cascante, la faccia angolosa, la pelle giallastra con certi tocchi
verdi che dovevan far fremere una donna. le orecchie senza sangue,
parevano essere state staccate e poscia male appiccicate.

era cosa miseranda veder quell’ombra d’uomo, balbuziente, coll’aria
imbecillita, venir offrirsi al confronto, colla balda e aitante
consorte.

— ho il piacere di presentarti il signor oreste soranzi.... — fe’
maddalena.

— ah! piacere.... — biascicò paolo, con un inchino sur un fianco.

— lo conoscerai.... è il padrone della casa in cui ha sempre abitato la
mia famiglia....

— ah! vedo.... infatti, adesso mi ricordo. ma.... è un pezzo che non lo
vedo.... oh! se è un pezzo.... sicuro.... ma che bel giovinotto s’è....
s’è fatto.

— mi diceva che il suo povero papà ha quasi perduta la vista.

— ohi mi rincresce.... proprio. che lo saluti tanto il papà.... e
anche la mamma.... oh! venivano sempre in negozio.... e si balla.... si
balla? bravo.... bravo.... a ben ri.... rivederla. — e cacciatasi una
mano in una tasca delle falde.... lentamente s’allontanò.

quando minelli fu uscito, oreste guardò fisso, con intenzione,
maddalena, la quale sorrise.

— ho paura che.... — cominciò egli, ma fermandosi tosto già pentito.

— di che cosa?

— ve lo dirò un giorno.... se ve lo dirò....; ora è troppo presto.

— va bene.... sentiremo anche questa....

— signora minelli — entrò a dire una voce da basso profondo — vuol
favorirmi per la quadriglia....? è promessa, se se ne ricorda....

— scusi, signor soranzi, la quadriglia mi chiama.... eccomi, signor
tabarini.... —

                                 * * *

quella sera — martedì — la festa fu breve, e soranzi non potè dir altro
a maddalena. contro il solito, essa ballò sempre.

                                 * * *

                    _pensieri notturni di maddalena
                       dopo quel primo incontro._

cosa voleva dire soranzi colle parole: «ho paura che....?» che non
mi crede felice o che presto dovrò restar vedova? forse una cosa e
l’altra.... sarebbe un secondo marito conveniente soranzi.... ma lo
sposerei io? — è ricco, ha modi da gentiluomo, è simpatico, n’ho sempre
sentito dire un gran bene fin dall’infanzia.... ma non mi seduce....
diciamo però la verità.... chi mai potrebbe adesso farmi perdere il
cervello....? se giulio fosse stato soranzi o se soranzi fosse giulio,
quale felicità.... maledetto giulio....

                                 * * *

                   _pensieri come sopra di soranzi._

un pensiero solo espresso da una parola sola ripetuta e vegliando e
dormendo male: _maddalena!_

                                 * * *

soranzi non mancava mai ai festini della società, e tutti dovettero
accorgersi che egli vi veniva per l’unico scopo di trovarsi con
maddalena.

i giovinotti e i giovinetti noncurati, allora cominciarono a guardar
in cagnesco quel signore che non conoscevano, il quale aveva avuto
semplicemente a mostrarsi per assorbire tutta l’attenzione di maddalena
e — quel che era orribile a pensarci — fors’anche le di lei simpatie
— perchè le loro sedute a due erano d’una frequenza e d’una lunghezza
tali da permettere di sospettarlo. — dunque egli aveva dello spirito?
— però, pensavano che le cose non potevano essere _serie_.... perchè
nessun atto, nessun detto meno che conveniente non era mai stato
notato, neanche dai più indiscreti. — e tuttavia che si dicevano di
così interessante da poter trovar piacere a star insieme tanto a lungo?
— e quel minelli che non ci trovava niente di male!

maddalena, non solo non si curava di quello che si diceva e che non
ignorava, perchè o la gelosia dell’uno o la malignità dell’altro glielo
avevan lasciato capire — ma pareva facesse a bella posta di tutto per
inasprire peggio e gelosi e maligni.

tuttavia soranzi non progrediva di un punto nella conquista di
maddalena. ella lo lasciava discorrere di tutto, anche dell’amore in
generale, ma quando egli toccava quel tal tasto.... ella faceva deviare
il discorso. s’egli insisteva, ella scherzava — e una volta ch’ella
volle lasciarsi costringere ad udire una dichiarazione formale, rispose
seriamente una parola sola e glaciale: — impossibile!

— ebbene! — fe’ egli esasperato. — sia pure impossibile...! io vi amerò
egualmente, perchè non posso vivere che a questa condizione. avete
capito? —

ella non disse nulla, gli lanciò un’occhiata fra lo spaventato e il
giojoso, che dovette lasciargli intravedere un lembo di cielo.... e non
si lasciò più avvicinare per tutta la sera.


coricandosi poi e pensando a quella escandescenza, maddalena rideva
mormorando fra sè: — se io resto vedova stasera.... soranzi mi sposa
domani! —

un sospiro del marito giù assonnato attrasse il di lei sguardo su di
lui. allora ebbe un moto di nausea e d’odio, e mormorò ancora: — è una
posizione pagata a caro prezzo la mia.... se.... il signore volesse
ricordarsi di me.... non sarebbe tempo? —

frattanto finiamo d’avviluppare soranzi.... perchè si sposa una
fanciulla, si può corteggiarla maritata.... ma si può non volerla
vedova.... ora con maddalena non si scherza più!

                                 * * *

soranzi non le fece più alcuna dichiarazione, temendo guastare. egli
si teneva certo, del resto, che un giorno o l’altro ella gli avrebbe
corrisposto. questione di tempo. una donna come maddalena non poteva
non amare. si vedeva che affettava indifferenza, che cercava nelle
distrazioni mondane il mezzo di stordirsi, e rideva perchè troppo fiera
per far la vittima, per mostrarsi crudelmente disillusa, disgustata
di quel matrimonio contratto per inesperienza. — ma un giorno doveva
venire, in cui la sua pazienza sarebbe esaurita, in cui il suo cuore
sentirebbe prepotente, invincibile il bisogno d’amare e d’essere amata.
allora egli sarebbe là.... e la salverebbe. sì, perchè al suo amore,
soranzi annetteva anche una missione morale. gli pareva che dandosi
ad un altro ella cadrebbe nel fango — mentre, affidandosi a lui, ella
sarebbe salva! — è la morale degli uomini innamorati sul serio.... e
anche di quegli altri.




avvicinandosi la fine del carnevale, a qualche membro della _società
delle belle donne_, che faceva parte anche di un’altra società danzante
detta _dei brutti uomini_ — tanto per poter gettar sei notti per
settimana in luogo di tre _sole_ — venne in mente di proporre che
le due società avessero a fondersi, per dare unite, nella settimana
grassa, una festa da ballo _monstre_.

le due società rivaleggiavano quell’inverno a chi dava le più splendide
feste.

se i membri dell’una si ritenevano, in buona fede, il fiore dei
ballerini della borghesia — i membri dell’altra si proclamavano la
_crème del bon ton_.

riconoscendosi degne l’una dell’altra, la proposta fu accolta con
entusiasmo da ambe le parti, e venne fissato il mercoledì grasso per
la festa della fusione o dei _fusi_ o dei _confusi_, come dissero i
soliti spiritosi — festa che fu, secondo le previsioni, affollatissima,
elegantissima, ecc., ecc.

noi ne faremmo la descrizione, se non l’avesse già fatta allora,
subito, l’indomani, un compiacente e riconoscente cronista, il quale
pagò la sua porzione.... sproporzionata di _buffet_, col mettere
nel suo foglio l’iniziale del nome di tutte le belle donne....,
enormità che ebbe per conseguenza una scissura terribile fra le belle
e le brutte — con qual delizia dei mariti o in qualsiasi altro modo
congiunti, lo dicano quelli che hanno provato le strida dell’orgoglio
d’una bella offesa o le atrabiliari, cavernose, tragiche declamazioni
d’una brutta conculcata!

ma nè festa nè scissura ci interessano punto. quel che ci preme è
seguir maddalena, ossia avvicinarci a lei.

è una sera che segnerà una gran data nella vita sua e di altri — non si
può perderla di vista un solo istante.

eccola nel solito salotto giallo, attorniata dalla sua corte maschile
che pende dalle di lei labbra. — ella ha già dichiarato che non
ballerà, perchè s’è fatta male a un piede, l’ultima festa — e perciò
s’è messo un abito di velluto nero.

ah! quell’abito di velluto nero.... ossia.... insomma, il tutto insieme
di maddalena quella sera.... fece un gran male!

era proprio la _toilette_ che più conveniva al suo genere di bellezza
e che ne faceva spiccare tutte le rare qualità, come non mai in alcuna
delle feste precedenti — anche perchè era la prima volta ch’ella veniva
scollata.... fino a quel _punto_.

era il non _plus-ultra_ dell’arte di offrire e dì celare quei
tesori.... che in questo mondo fanno sprecare tanti tesori...

su quel seno alabastrino, d’una freschezza che faceva pensare ad una
neve rosea, la luce, piovendo dalle lumiere, giocava per mostrare delle
trasparenze azzurrine. i suoi capelli avevano delle fosforescenze che
parevan dire: — baciate qui!.... — e tutta lei un profumo che faceva
piegar le ginocchia.

gli uomini, guardandola, strabuzzavano e mandavano dei sospiri,
mormorando: — ci vuol pazienza! — e le donne, facendo dei confronti fra
loro e lei, sorridevano del sorriso stereotipo delle feste da ballo —
e se alcuno vantava le bellezze di lei, il miele che usciva dalle loro
labbra, era sempre miele.... ma pareva avesse un po’ sofferto.

                                 * * *

chi soffriva più di tutti a quella vista era oreste, che, appoggiato
al caminetto, contemplava, pallido per l’emozione, maddalena, la quale
sembrava non l’avesse ancora veduto. egli attendeva con intollerabile
pazienza che la festa cominciasse, per poter avvicinarsi a lei. non
voleva confondersi nella folla di quegli adoratori.... perchè, quella
sera, l’impressione di tanta beltà, sotto un aspetto nuovo, era
stata così forte, ch’egli vaneggiava fra sè.... e voleva rinnovare
l’attacco.... minacciandola di uccidersi se ella perdurasse a non aver
pietà di lui. —

— ma andatevene una volta! — gridava egli mentalmente a tutta
quella gente — andatevene, se non volete che io commetta qualche
eccesso....! —

finalmente egli fu esaudito.... giungeva la prima onda di lontane
armonie. una _polka_ apriva la festa.

i cortigiani s’inchinarono a maddalena per correre sul campo di
battaglia, ed ella restò sola fra due giovinetti di mezzo pelo.

allora, guardato l’uno e poi guardato l’altro, sbadigliò.

— oh! — fece, dopo, mostrando avvedersi proprio in quel punto della
presenza di soranzi, e sorridendogli con un lieve moto d’invito. — egli
comprese e mosse verso di lei.... — i due giovinetti compresero del
pari e mossero verso l’uscita, maledicendo all’importuno.

— proprio adesso — dicevano — che si poteva.... nossignori!.... —

oreste sedè a fianco di maddalena, e, prendendole la mano, mormorò con
voce tremante:

— finalmente!.... —

ella lo guardò seria, poi distolse gli occhi da lui e stette pensosa.

pareva turbata.

era il caldo più sensibile del solito? era il suo stesso profumo....
sempre quel profumo? era l’effetto d’una musica eccitante udita da
lungi, in quel silenzio? era un subitaneo moto del sangue ardente, che
si faceva giuoco dei di lei propositi.... o era abilità?

probabilmente pensava solo a quello che voleva dire e udire, e perciò
dimenticava sempre la sua mano in quella di lui.

ma quando una più forte pressione la fece accorta di tale dimenticanza,
si riscosse, parve sorpresa di quell’istante d’abbandono, tornò la
maddalena delle altre sere, ritirò la mano, e, ridendo, disse:

— alle volte non si sa proprio quello che si fa....

— ecco, vi siete già pentita di avermi reso, un momento, felice.

— come! eravate felice?

— non vi amo io forse....? e quando si ama, non si è felici per uno
sguardo, per una stretta di mano?

— siete poco esigente.

— non mi permettete di più.

— che cosa volete mai....? no.... basta! non voglio che parliate.

— ma no.... sentite.

— se dite una sola parola, me ne vado.

— ed io voglio che m’ascoltiate! — egli le aveva afferrato un braccio,
ma non era necessario. ella aveva allora finito di convincersi che non
era un semplice capriccio l’amore confessato da oreste; e quella sera
sentiva, per lo meno, la curiosità di un linguaggio ispirato dalla
passione.

— ascolto.... — disse freddamente, fingendosi offesa da quella violenza
a cui ella pareva assoggettarsi per pura prudenza; e ascoltò cogli
occhi al suolo, immota.

— sentite, maddalena, io sono stanco di vivere a questo modo. voi
dite che non potete amare.... vi fate beffe di tutti, ridete vedendo
quali sentimenti ispirate.... è verissimo; ma io non credo che voi non
possiate amare.

— amo mio marito.... — disse seccamente maddalena.

— no....! —

si guardarono, egli cogli occhi lampeggianti.... ella peggio che
sdegnata, sdegnosa. dopo una breve pausa, in cui oreste mise alla
tortura il cervello per trovare la maniera di animare quella statua,
ripigliò:

— voi non amate nessuno ancora.... tutti lo sanno; ma questo è solo
perchè non credete ad alcuno. quando troverete uno che sappia.... che
possa convincervi della veracità della sua passione, voi lo amerete!
ebbene.... che cosa volete che si faccia per convincervi?.... andiamo!
qual prova pretendete da me?

— io non pretendo niente.

— guardate, maddalena, che qualche giorno voi mi ridurrete alla
disperazione! — ma tosto calmandosi con uno sforzo, supplicò:

— via, siate buona.... ditemi.... che cosa devo fare per meritare il
vostro amore.... voi diffidate.... voi temete che, appagato ciò che si
chiama capriccio.... io non v’abbandoni! come mi giudicate male....!
guardate se non è vero.... volete lasciare vostro marito....? volete
che partiamo....? dettate le vostre condizioni.... tutto io accetterò
ciecamente.... ma non fatemi soffrire di più!

— amo mio marito.

— amate vostro marito.... e m’ascoltate!? — gridò oreste quasi fuori di
sè....

— m’avete trattenuta.

— maddalena.... voi non avete cuore....

— io non avrei cuore.... se vi amassi.

— ma perchè.... perchè?

— perchè il mio amore vi sarebbe fatale.

— e sia fatale!... mi faccia morire! morirò almeno per avervi
posseduta.... non perchè forzato a rinunciare a voi!

— addio. — ella s’alzava.

— no.... non voglio. — oreste la tratteneva di nuovo.

— md voi mi compromettete!... guardate! —

qualcuno era dietro la portiera, la quale oscillava.

maddalena si diede subito un contegno, fingendo abbottonarsi i guanti.
intanto oreste mormorava: — perdono! — ed ella rispondeva affettuosa e
sorridente: — siate savio adesso! —

qualcuno era entrato, e quando maddalena, al fruscìo de’ passi sul
tappeto, alzò lo sguardo, trasalì suo malgrado....

ritto, appoggiato al caminetto, riconobbe giulio. — giulio di fronte a
lei, che la mirava sogghignando.

oreste s’accorse del moto di maddalena, e guardò a sua volta
quell’individuo.

— ah! vedo — fece egli piano a maddalena — lo conoscete?

— io.... no.... cioè, non ho alcun rapporto con lui, ma lo conosco di
vista.

— l’avete veduto forse presso quella vostra amica severina....

— appunto.

— lo credevate anche voi suo fratello?

— sì.... sicuro.... come mai avrei potuto dubitarne....? ma perchè mi
fate questa domanda?

— perchè.... ora è suo marito.

— ah! sì....? — e maddalena pensò con rammarico alla sua vendetta non
riuscita.

— sì.... ma....

— ma cosa?

— ma la maldicenza vuole ch’egli abbia fatto un matrimonio di
speculazione.... tutto quello che si può dire di speculazione.... nel
senso spregevole. capite?

— non è difficile.

— voi ne dovreste saper qualche cosa.

— io ho avuto solo una brevissima relazione con severina. ai miei
parenti non piaceva che la frequentassi; dicevano che non era
un’amicizia conveniente.... non so poi perchè.

— e voi che pensate di quella donna?

— era una donna gentile.

— ma la vostra opinione quanto a carattere?

— non saprei.... la sola impressione che io ne ho conservata è quella
delle sue gentilezze.... ma, come v’ho detto, l’ho conosciuta così
poco.

— non avete domandato ai vostri genitori la ragione della loro
contrarietà?

— sì.... m’hanno detto che una donna, la quale non ha occupazione di
sorta e ama il lusso, non è una buona amicizia.

— e dopo il vostro matrimonio non l’avete più veduta?

— no.... ma si potrebbe sapere perchè v’interessate tanto per....?

— ve lo dirò un giorno....! — fe’ oreste coll’accento di chi ha provato
una bella soddisfazione.

— ecco un’altra cosa che mi direte un giorno.... io voglio sperare che
ne verrà una terza e poi una quarta....

— certo.

— quando?

— un giorno.

— brutto cattivo.... oh! egli s’è seduto.... allontanatevi un momento.
forse si ferma semplicemente perchè sospetta.... quando sarete uscito,
s’allontanerà. del resto, a minuti vi sarà il riposo.... ed è meglio
che non ci trovino ancor insieme.

— vi obbedisco.... —

e oreste, che s’era alzato, s’inchinò ed uscì.

                                 * * *

maddalena, al moversi di oreste, lanciò un’occhiata alla sfuggita a
giulio per scoprire sul suo volto se v’era o no qualche sospetto. —
quale non fu la sua ira nel vedervi, e ancor più beffardo, il sogghigno
di prima!

offesa, volle respingere l’insulto coll’insulto, e al sogghigno oppose
un’espressione di sprezzo, con cui le pareva di doverlo annientare.

fu un’imprudenza.

giulio non capì l’espressione, vide solo uno sguardo insistente,
e pensando che maddalena avesse allontanato oreste per far posto a
lui.... con fatuo sorriso e con una cert’aria di degnazione mosse verso
lei.... ma fu un tantino sorpreso quando la vide alzarsi tutta seria e
avviarsi verso l’uscio....

— maddalena.... — pregò egli allora — maddalena!

— maddalena?.... — fece ella rivolgendosi rapidamente come punta da uno
spino, guardandolo fredda e severa.

— sì, maddalena! — rispose egli insinuante, — che ha troppo spirito per
non perdonare un peccato veniale di gioventù.

— mi direste questo davanti a vostra moglie?

— oh! mia moglie!... — l’ebete, triviale sorriso di giulio nel dir
questo, sarebbe stato una rivelazione per maddalena, quand’anche ella
avesse ignorato la abbiettezza di quei due esseri.

ella guardò quell’uomo che aveva tanto amato, e pensò: — se mai io
non avessi scoperto ed egli mi avesse sposata, chi sa cosa m’avrebbe
proposto.... o imposto, un giorno! —

— facciamo la pace adunque?.... — e così dicendo, tutto mellifluo
s’avanzò d’un passo, stendendole la destra.

maddalena si ritrasse di due, il suo volto esprimeva ribrezzo — e disse
vibrata:

— vi proibisco non solo di avvicinarmi, ma anche di lasciar capire in
alcun modo, sulla festa, che voi mi conoscete.... altrimenti, guai!

— guai.... che cosa? — fe’ una voce alle di lei spalle.

era oreste che rientrava e che si fermò sorpreso, incerto, a guardar
l’uno e l’altra.

cattiva consigliera fu l’ira a maddalena in quel punto. ella non seppe
trattenersi, e rivolgendosi a oreste, gli disse piano con vivacità:

— ve lo raccomando!

— ah! — esclamò oreste, e guardò giulio con espressione derisoria.

giulio si fe’ smorto, e volendo punire maddalena del suo scherno —
disse umilmente, con sorriso maligno:

— signora.... se ella vuol aver la gentilezza di ricordarsene.... noi
siamo due vecchie conoscenze.... due buoni amici.... —

maddalena tremò.... che stava per avvenire? — oreste la interrogava
collo sguardo, in attesa d’una parola, d’un cenno, per farla finita
con quel villano. ella sentiva che il cuore di lui batteva con estrema
violenza, e questo accresceva il di lei timore.

— non se ne ricorda proprio più? — continuò giulio col medesimo sorriso.

maddalena si strinse al braccio di oreste, quasi implorando ajuto.

— pare di no!.... — proruppe oreste con accento provocante.

— è forse lei che glielo vieta? — domandò giulio sempre nel medesimo
tuono.

— oh! oh! mi pare che basti la signora — ribattè oreste con uno scoppio
di riso.

giulio si morse le labbra, e preso un atteggiamento da bravo, disse:

— scusi.... vorrebbe favorire un minuto?

— due, se crede.

— per carità.... prudenza! — supplicò maddalena.

— non temete.... si tratta di voi.... e non vi saranno certamente
scandali.... —

maddalena li seguì collo sguardo tutta tremante.... non temeva più per
sè, dopo le parole di oreste.

in quel momento il suo cuore aveva un primo palpito — temeva per
lui.... e la folla dei suoi adoratori che, finita la _polka_,
allora tornava presso di lei, la trovò poco disposta alla ciarla e
straordinariamente grave.

                                 * * *

se il lettore crede che giulio volesse sfidare oreste, si sbaglia.
egli voleva anzi comporre quel principio di litigio e dando una
lezione a maddalena, e all’amico, togliere, anche per l’avvenire, ogni
possibilità di nuovi screzj con lui — perchè egli amava la sua pace.

aveva preso per un istante l’aria da rodomonte, perchè v’era presente
una donna, ma non ci teneva affatto a passare per un accattabrighe. —
perciò bisognava commettere una bassezza, ma a lui non pareva tale,
e d’altronde non era quello che potesse imbarazzarlo. non sì tosto
fu uscito dal salotto giallo, che la sua fierezza rientrò — ed egli
prese invece un’aria fra il filosofo, o uomo di mondo, e il protettore,
che sta per dare una lezione di _savoir vivre_ a un povero ingenuo. —
cacciò i pollici nelle taschine del corpetto, lasciando fuori le altre
tre dita a battere il tamburo, e cominciò:

— senta.... può essere una soddisfazione per la vanità d’una signora
il far nascere una contesa fra due galantuomini.... (ad oreste, questa
imparzialità, questa indistinzione, suonò poco gradevole).... ma
quanto a me, dichiaro che.... pel rispetto dovuto alla vita umana....
per risparmiare a mia moglie il dolore di restar vedova, e ai di lei
genitori quello di perdere un figlio.... — ella è il signor soranzi....
non è vero? ella non si ricorderà di me, ma io mi ricordo di lei....
— dunque, per tornare al nostro discorso.... sediamo qui, se non le
spiace, così non saremo disturbati.... — erano nella sala da giuoco
ancor vuota. — per continuare, diceva, la prego di ascoltarmi con
perfetta calma. quanto le dirò non le andrà molto a sangue.... oh! lo
so!.... il togliere le illusioni sur una donna che.... per la quale ci
interessiamo.... torna assai disaggradevole.... ma.... ma noi dobbiamo
pensare che siamo in questo mondo.... e che v’è una sorpresa ad ogni
piè sospinto. però.... creda a me.... che forse ho vissuto più di
lei.... ho mangiato un patrimonio! — creda, dico, che il meglio che
si può fare è di viver sempre nel disinganno proprio, e senza alcuna
illusione sulle donne. allora le donne si possono gustare per quel che
sono e non per quello che noi sogniamo che siano.... e che non possono
essere.... almeno, in genere, mi risulta questo....

— ma.... — interruppe oreste, che, durante tal preambolo, era passato
dalla sorpresa alla noja, e infine all’apprensione — si direbbe che
ella creda a un rapporto qualunque fra me e quella signora.... io le
posso giurare....

— ah! io non ho detto niente.... nè ella ha alcun dovere di coscienza
di giurare.... che diavolo! ella ha voluto intervenire a difendere la
signora per generosità, per spirito di cavalleria.... sta benissimo. ma
le pare che vi possa essere difesa dove non c’è offesa?

— ma ella ha ben veduto che la signora s’è risentita....

— ah! sì.... nol nego.... una signora si risente sempre se le dicono in
pubblico quel che non vuol sentire.... ma che si può dirle....

— come?! ella persiste....

— se ella prende questo tuono.... io non posso più continuare. valeva
proprio la pena che io facessi quasi una prefazione, per vedere poi che
ella non vuol comprendere, e crede più a chi la inganna che non a me,
il quale sto per dirle la verità, affine di risparmiare ad ambedue dei
dispiaceri inutili.... pronto, se occorre, a provarla tale verità!

— parli pure — mormorò oreste con voce sorda, domandandosi con paura
che cosa mai potrebbe uscire da quelle labbra.

— io ho detto alla signora maddalena che io la conosco.... ed è vero.
io la conosco così poco, che è stata mia amante.

— ah! — gemette oreste.

— glielo giuro, e, se ne dubita, venga da mia moglie, la quale le
narrerà d’una certa scena che maddalena le fece quando io, che avevo
già degli obblighi con severina, non potendo più lusingare quella
ragazza, la quale mi perseguitava col suo amore, non mi lasciai più
vedere da lei. si imaginò d’aver ricevuto chi sa qual torto dalla
povera severina, e le fece una scena ridicola, perchè avesse a romperla
con me. per fortuna, severina è una donna di buon senso e capì subito
che era la gelosia d’un amore non corrisposto....

— e questi rapporti che ella ha avuti con maddalena? — disse con sforzo
oreste, provandosi a sorridere....

— oh! sa bene.... — e giulio, appressate le labbra all’orecchio di
soranzi, vi versò certe confidenze che, come veleno, cagionarono un
dolore atrocissimo al povero giovine.

se ne avvide giulio, e mascherando la sua compiacenza, chè era
appunto l’effetto ch’egli voleva ottenere, sotto una espressione
d’interessamento pietoso:

— ella divien smorto.... non aveva dunque torto io di dirle che ella
aveva qualche cosa, qui, per quella donna? tanto meglio! ella ora ha
aperti gli occhi e si saprà regolare. quel che mi premeva, era che ella
fosse persuaso che io non sono un villano, e che fra noi non ci può
essere alcun motivo d’attrito. ho tanto piacere di averla conosciuto. a
rivederci. —

e se ne andò lasciando oreste fremente di rabbia e con un’acutissima
fitta sotto il cuore, che gli rendeva oltremodo penoso il respirare.

quale doloroso destarsi!

aver sognato una perfezione morale rispondente alla perfezione fisica,
e trovare una.... civetta volgare, con un _passato_ per sopramercato!

altro che vittima! — e come sapeva mentire! ella la rivale disgraziata
di severina, l’amante respinta di giulio.... solo pochi istanti prima,
osava asserire che conosceva giulio di vista! e che aveva trascurato
l’amicizia di severina per ordine superiore....

e se della di lei giovinezza veniva a conoscere ora quel mistero. —
ed era il solo, poi? — chi sa quali misteri celava la sua esistenza
conjugale.... con tale marito....

«amo mio marito....» — diceva — ma questo doveva esser vero come il
«conosco giulio di vista!»

restava pura e semplice la bellezza.... ma, con un’anima così nera, era
una bellezza orribile. era deciso.... bisognava fuggire maddalena.

e pronunciando il sì della decisione, s’alzò e uscì avviandosi
verso la guardaroba, ma quando fu sul limitare di quella si fermò
titubante. —

— ricomincia la musica, — pensò — maddalena sarà sola e mi aspetterà.
partire colla ferma risoluzione di non vederla più.... sta bene, ma
non prendermi proprio alcuna soddisfazione, nemmeno quella di vederla
arrossire.... è un po’ da collegiale che fugge. si direbbe che ho paura
di lei!.... ella mi ha ingannato; io devo punirla.... con dignità,
sia.... ma punirla. —

attraversò di nuovo le sale ed entrò nel noto salotto.

tanta ira bolliva nel suo petto.... e non appena la rivide.... sentì
svanire tutti i suoi propositi. maledetta quella beltà! maledetto quel
seno!.... ed era possibile che un involucro tanto affascinante fosse
animato da uno spirito infernale?

— facciamo l’ultima prova! — si disse.

maddalena guardò oreste che s’avanzava e fu colpita dal di lui pallore,
ma ella non poteva rivolgergli alcuna domanda, perchè non era sola.

egli sedette vicino a lei, dicendo:

— buona sera, signore!

— buona sera! — risposero le signore, che erano tre, maddalena e due
vecchie derelitte e non rassegnate; oh! lo si vedeva....

maddalena, ansiosa di sapere che cosa fosse avvenuto, disse:

— signor soranzi, volete favorirmi....? è tutta sera che non vedo mio
marito.

— ai vostri comandi, signora — fece egli serio alzandosi.

le due vecchie guardaronsi fra loro ammiccando, ed avevan ragione. il
pretesto di maddalena poteva esser migliore, ma ella aveva fretta.

usciti:

— dunque....? — fe’ maddalena.

— dunque, niente.

— come, niente?.... andiamo, voglio sapere.

— e io vorrei non saper nulla.

— che cosa dite?

— dico che se in questo momento potessi perdere la memoria, sarei un
uomo felice.... e così.... —

egli chinò il capo melanconicamente.

— insomma.... ho detto che voglio sapere — continuò maddalena con
vivacità.

— ma che cosa volete sapere? — rispose oreste animandosi. — che è un
vigliacco? sì, è vero, è un vigliacco, è tutto quello di odioso che
potete imaginare.... ma, e allora perchè gli avete creduto....? perchè
vi siete affidata a lui? perchè avete sperato qualche cosa da lui?
dite! — ma perchè mai vi parlo io di cose che sapete meglio di me!?
quel che è stato è stato, e non può cancellarsi. tuttavia, non temete
di nulla. il vostro segreto sarà da me custodito come se si trattasse
dell’onore di mia madre. non ho alcun diritto di esercitare un
sindacato qualsiasi sulla vostra giovinezza.... però.... avrei voluto
trovare in voi una donna...

— dite pure.... una donna onesta? la sono sempre stata.... la sarò
ancora.... sapete! — esclamò maddalena, ironica, fermandosi. alle prime
parole di oreste, vedendosi scoperta, s’era sentita le fiamme al viso,
ma ella aveva subito riacquistato il suo sangue freddo, e, all’attacco
inatteso, rispondeva attaccando, a sua volta, con impeto....

— se io potessi agire senza scandalo ve ne convincerei.... ma e poi....
che dico io?.... credete quello che volete.... perchè devo convincervi
io di qualche cosa?.... chi siete voi?.... un ragazzo! —

oreste la guardò stupefatto, ma dovette abbassare gli occhi, suo
malgrado, soggiogato. d’altronde, quell’ira gli piaceva, quel sentirsi
investito da una donna era una voluttà nuova.... e consolante, perchè
gli pareva che ella stesse per provargli la sua innocenza. ma ella
voleva provargli tutt’altro.

— sì, un ragazzo! e ve lo provo! — continuò, meno veemente, vedendolo
intimidito, ma tuttavia vivacissima. — voi vi fate presentare e mi fate
la corte.... volete ch’io manchi a’ miei doveri.... volete rapirmi!....
e perchè, un imbecille, che non conoscete, e che avete, nel medesimo
tempo, delle ragioni per disprezzare, viene a dirvi chi sa quali
infamie sul conto mio, voi, senza menomamente riflettere, senza neppur
farmi l’onore di dubitare un solo istante della verità di tali infamie,
venite ad insultarmi e a dirmi.... con qual diritto poi, sarei curiosa
di saperlo: — voi non siete una donna onesta.... — ah! io dovevo
lasciarmi sedurre, dovevo lasciarmi rapire da voi per essere una donna
onesta! ragazzo! ragazzo! per voi io sono una donna onesta....! quanto
al _rimanente_, non siete voi che dovete darvene pensiero. —

seguì un istante di silenzio — ella tremava per la concitazione — egli
gioiva.

maddalena parve raccogliersi, e, poscia, ripigliò con più calma e con
una certa gravità.

— vi hanno detto che ho commesso una leggiera imprudenza giovanile....
badiamo bene, _leggiera_! è verissimo.... sì, sono stata imprudente,
perchè ero inesperta. la colpa quindi di chi è?.... de’ miei genitori,
e specialmente di mia madre.... buona donna, sì.... ma, madre....
per ridere. basta forse generare, dar cibo, vestito, ricovero.... per
poter esser madre? madre per il corpo forse....; ma, e all’anima chi
ci deve pensare?.... basta darne l’incarico al confessore? ma questo
è precisamente quello che non si deve fare, perchè è assurdo, enorme!
— alle corte.... mia madre ha ella mai pensato ch’io avessi un cuore
e un cervello? — ha ella mai veduto che io diventava una giovinetta?
— ignorava ella che cosa si agita, qui dentro, nelle fanciulle? — ha
ella temuto un solo istante che mi si potessero tendere insidie? — mi
ha ella mai detto che cosa è il mondo? — ma, dio mio! se fossi anche
caduta nel fango.... io sarei perfettamente innocente! ma non sono
caduta! — che coso ho a rimproverarmi infine?.... ho a rimproverarmi
d’aver amato, all’età in cui non si può far altro che amare....
perchè tutto, in noi e fuori di noi, non parla che d’amore.... — ho a
rimproverarmi d’aver creduto, per un momento, alle lusinghe del primo
essere che riuscì a interessarmi. e questo cosa vuol dire? l’ho amato
ed ora l’odio.... non vi pare che l’odio cancelli tanto bene l’amore,
da rifare persino la verginità di un’anima? — e voi siete crudele
al punto da farmi un delitto di una imprudenza giovanile, e perchè?
perchè sono viva.... e mi fate la corte! — se io, allora, quando
scopersi il tradimento, mi fossi uccisa o fossi morta di crepacuore....
oh! allora vi sareste unito agli altri e mi avreste compassionata,
avreste maledetto a lui!.... ma non sono morta.... e quindi io sono
una donna colpevole e spregevole, ed egli è un giovinotto galante
da invidiarsi, perchè sa far bene il suo mestiere. — vi giuro però,
che se, una certa notte di torture indescrivibili, non sono morta, o
per lo meno impazzita, la prima a esserne maravigliata, l’indomani,
fui io medesima. ma allora, rientrata in me, dovetti ridere di me e
degli altri. soffrire?.... a che serviva?.... voi direte scherzando:
— che donna forte!... — sia pure. non è una fortuna per una donna
l’aver sentito una superiorità morale non comune? non ci foss’altro
vantaggio.... v’è quello di poter ridere di tutto. —

qui maddalena, prendendo un tono leggiermente derisorio:

— e ora che v’ho detto tante belle verità.... che cosa mi farete
l’onore di pensare di me?.... sentite.... se siete di coscienza tanto
inesorabile per noi povere donne.... accettate un buon consiglio....
rinunciate fin d’ora a qualsiasi donna.... a meno che non possiate
seguirla, passo per passo, dal giorno in cui schiude gli occhi fino
a quello in cui la sposerete.... e ancora!.... leggerete voi nel suo
pensiero?.... credetemi.... donne che non abbiano commesso imprudenze
ne troverete....; chi sa com’erano tenute d’occhio! — ma donne che
non abbiano sognate imprudenze, dormendo.... e non dormendo, non
ne troverete una! ed è naturale. se voi, a sedici anni, ispirato
dai poeti, avete chiesto forse in ginocchio un bacio alla vostra
servetta.... perchè non volete che una fanciulla non pensi al marito?
volete permetterle almeno di occuparsi del destino della sua vita,
che sta tutto nella parola: marito? e marito che cosa vuol dire? —
uomo. —

si tacque, e si continuò a passeggiare in su e in giù, per la stessa
sala, non curando, non vedendo neppure quelli che passavano, i quali
invece vedevano e non erano indifferenti.

ella attendeva la prima parola di lui.... ed egli non la trovava.

impazientita, maddalena uscì, infine, a dire:

— e così?

— e così, maddalena, io non so che dire. so soltanto che ho il caos nel
cervello e un male indicibile al cuore.

— allora.... — fe’ ella, scattando, severa, imperiosa — addio....
andatevene, e che io non vi veda mai più! —

oreste non s’era ancora riavuto dalla prima sorpresa, che maddalena era
già molto lontana.

— sciocco.... imbecille mille volte ch’io sono! — e si batteva la
fronte — è un’ora.... un’ora! che mi parla, per farmi capire che mi
ama.... ed io.... io faccio l’austero, il pedante, senza dirle una
buona parola.... a lei, che merita tutto! che fuoco! che franchezza!
che sentimento! — ah! rimediamo.... rimediamo subito....; io non
voglio.... non posso perderla. —

se egli avesse saputo che maddalena non aveva voluto che provarlo con
quell’_andatevene_.... scandagliare, sapere se e qual effetto realmente
aveva avuto il malaugurato incidente!

ella ebbe dunque un sorriso di trionfo quando lo vide comparire
nel salone e cercarla collo sguardo. ora era sicura.... egli non le
sfuggiva.

allora maddalena gli si mostrò, ed egli andava verso di lei, con aria
umile e pentita.... ma ad un tratto si fermò sorpreso ed esitante.
maddalena seguì la direzione del di lui sguardo, e non fu meno sorpresa
di oreste.

sulla soglia dell’ingresso di destra stava il padre papetti.

papetti cercava di sua figlia, ma era tanto stordito dal rumore della
festa, dallo spettacolo per lui nuovo, dal caldo del gas, e da una
bottiglia testè vuotata, che non ci vedeva quasi più — e anche quel
poco come attraverso un velo grigio.

per sua fortuna, maddalena, punta dalla curiosità di sapere come mai
egli si trovasse là, andò tosto a lui.

— tu papà.... ad una festa da ballo? — fe’ ella piantandogli davanti
come trasecolata.

— ah! brava, cercava appunto di te.... ma qui come si fa?... conducimi
in qualche angolo, ove si possa dir due parole.... qui nè ci vedo nè ci
sento.

— che cosa vuoi dirmi di bello e di nuovo? c’è forse qualcuno che
aspira all’onore della mia mano?

— è proprio il momento di scherzare.... è vero che tu non sai....

— ma son cose serie?

— pur troppo.

— oh! — ella non credeva affatto. — allora vieni qua nel salotto.... ti
piace il giallo?

— che domanda!.... benedetta gente che c’è al mondo — brontolava egli
mentre si attraversavano diverse sale, facendo strabiliare maddalena
— ecco.... ecco! si hanno chi sa quali dispiaceri...., chi sa quali
disgrazie ci minacciano.... e là si ride, si scherza, si balla? ma come
si fa? domando io.... come si può mettere la maschera dell’allegria sul
volto.... mentre nell’anima ci dovrebbe essere la disperazione....?

— disperazione?.... ah! eccoci qui.... e mi spiegherai.... — fece
maddalena lasciandosi cadere sur un divano.

— sissignora, ti spiegherò.... dunque sappi, prima di tutto, che mi
si è teso un tranello.... tuo marito credeva che col farmi bere.... io
avrei cantato.... ma io non canto mai! ci vuol altro!

— scusa.... non capisco... mio marito?

— sì.... tuo marito, che non avendo potuto indurmi a commettere una
corbelleria a mente fredda, perchè di giorno — ha creduto che ne avrei
commessa senza difficoltà un’altra, dopo qualche bicchiere di cipro,
perchè di sera, fra i tripudj e le danze.... ci vuol altro alla mia
età!

— scusa.... non capisco ancora.... mio marito....?

— ma non sai cosa mi ha proposto? mi ha proposto di consegnargli la
tua dote.... e se no, di prestar una garanzia equivalente, perchè ha un
bisogno straordinario. in poche parole.... è rovinato....

— mio marito rovinato?.... ma tu....

— no.... no.... è la pura verità.

— ma se fosse rovinato, io lo dovrei ben sapere....

— che cosa vuoi mai sapere tu?.... stai in negozio tu? sei al corrente
dei suoi affari tu? ti dice forse qualche cosa lui?

— no. ma appunto perchè non so niente e non mi dice niente.... devo
pensare che tu t’inganni. un marito rovinato nè può divertirsi nè può
spendere per sua moglie come fa il mio.

— ah! ah! ma, cara mia.... quando un uomo non sa far altro che bere....
non sa più nemmeno quel che si fa. paolo ha perduta la testa.... me
l’ha detto anche cavallazzi, il mercante sull’angolo, che è di là....
vuoi parlargli?

— no.... grazie.

— e per colmare la misura.... mi assicurano.... che paolo è andato....
che non c’è più speranza. il dottore moscatelli, che ho trovato
stasera al caffè, mi dice di non metterti in apprensione, ma però di
raccomandarti molta prudenza. capisci? per me già, mi dividerei di
letto. quando gli ho domandato: — ma, insomma, dottore, temete proprio
ch’egli possa morir presto....? — sono certo che non vivrà a lungo —
mi ha risposto. — e vuoi che io arrischi, foss’anche un soldo del tuo,
quando le cose sono a tal punto? se egli muore rovinato, non ti resta
che tornar in casa, già.... e allora la tua dote non sarà forse tanto
zucchero per te? — aaah! non me la sarei proprio imaginata! — ma siamo
intesi. ora io me ne vado, perchè è capace di tornare all’assalto, e
mi rincrescerebbe dar una mortificazione al marito di mia figlia. chi
l’avrebbe mai detto, eh? pareva il bue d’oro! mi rincresce per te....
mah! finchè c’è tuo padre.... non temere!.... buona notte.

— buona notte.... — mormorò maddalena macchinalmente.

ella pensavo a soranzi. rivelazioni così inaspettate l’avevano molto
turbata. ella doveva pensare a’ casi suoi. fra poco sarebbe vedova
e povera. il tornar in casa non le sorrideva certo! dunque....
dunque non restava che premunirsi contro la sventura. in qual modo?
coll’assicurarsi un secondo marito.... ora, di tutti gli uomini che la
corteggiavano, chi permetteva la speranza di poterlo divenire? — uno
solo, soranzi. — ma quella era l’ultima festa.... quando lo rivedrebbe?
e anche rivedendolo, le di lui disposizioni sarebbero.... quali?
una nuova conoscenza.... un ostacolo in famiglia.... insomma, non si
sa mai.... un giovane fa tanto presto a distrarsi! dunque, per non
arrischiare di perderlo, bisognava incatenarlo e subito. — subito....?
con qual mezzo.... con qual catena? ah! la catena c’era.... ma....

un diavolo, almeno uno, ci deve essere.... per ajutare le donne belle.




giulio non s’era contentato di abbeverare di fiele il soranzi, ma
certo ormai che v’era qualche cosa fra quei due, era andato a contare
il tutto a severina e quindi anche a un crocchio di _brutti uomini_.
mezz’ora dopo tutta la festa sapeva che la _minella_ e il soranzi se
la intendevano.... cosa del resto naturale in chi da fanciulla, ecc.,
ecc. — una donna che ha conosciuto un giulio, — dicevano alcuni in
faccia a giulio stesso, il quale ne godeva tutto — che cosa può mai
essere? —

maddalena capì esservi alcun che di mutato nell’opinione pubblica a
di lei riguardo, perchè tutti la guardavano con evidente curiosità —
ma.... poteva anche essere a motivo della sua _toilette_.

chi invece sapeva tutto e n’era dolentissimo, perchè una parola venuta
all’orecchio del marito poteva aver delle conseguenze gravissime, era
oreste, che aveva ricevuto delle congratulazioni, quali misteriose e
quali niente affatto....

non essendo, per caso, fatuo, nè vano, le avea respinte.... con tutta
la gentilezza e l’umiltà che si richiedevano — ma contenendosi a
fatica.

— ecco — si diceva — fra me e quella donna v’è niente, e io pel
mondo sono suo amante. — a tale ingiustizia, le parole di giulio gli
diventavano menzogne, e la sua tenerezza per lei si accresceva. avrebbe
voluto avvicinarla, ma n’era trattenuto dagli occhi di tutta quella
società che egli sentiva rivolti sopra sè stesso. per far qualche cosa,
entrò nella sala da gioco.

maddalena, che da più d’un’ora non lo vedeva, dopo aver girato per
le sale con aria indifferente, ma cercandolo, si decise a domandar a
qualcuno se avesse visto, per caso, il signor soranzi.

l’interrogato era una bella barba bianca, tutto compito e punto
pettegolo — per cui, benchè conoscesse la cronaca della serata, rispose
con perfetto ossequio:

— se lo desidera, sta giocando al bigliardo. vuol che glielo vada a
prendere?

— no.... basterebbe ch’ella gli dicesse che mio padre ha dovuto
partire. mi fa questa finezza?

— s’imagini! —

soranzi comprese il sottinteso, in due colpi perdette la partita e
corse da maddalena.

— finalmente! — fe’ ella mostrando una gran gioja nel rivederlo e
porgendogli la mano — credeva che foste proprio in collera per alcune
parole inconsiderate che mi sono sfuggite in un momento di vivacità....

— no.... anzi, quelle vostre parole mi hanno reso felice....

— felice?

— sì.... il perchè di questo ve lo dirò....

— un giorno; non è così?

— appunto. ho un’altra cosa importante da dirvi, ma quella ve la
dirò subito. sappiate che giulio e sua moglie devono essere stati ben
imprudenti e ben cattivi.... perchè stasera si dice quello che prima
non si è mai osato forse di pensare.

— cioè?

— cioè, che.... io.... che noi, insomma, ci amiamo.

— è tutto qui? — domandò maddalena senza nemmeno aggrottare le ciglia,
anzi sorridendogli adorabilmente.

— come! se è tutto qui? — esclamò oreste maravigliando. — cosa volete
che si dica di più?

— eh! lasciate un po’ che dicano! — continuò ella. — ma ecco l’ora di
cena.... volete essere mio cavaliere servente?

— ma come! non temete?

— che cosa? ah! ah! ma se dicono già di peggio.... — a proposito.... di
peggio o.... di meglio?

— voi che ne pensate?

— io....? — mormorò maddalena con civetteria, e appoggiatasi a lui, con
passo molle, l’occhio raggiante sempre fisso in volto ad oreste, che
non ci capiva più nulla, attraversò tutte le sale, fino al _buffet_,
ove ella lo fece sedere ad un tavolino che bastava appena per due
persone.

— vedete se ho paura? — disse maddalena. — mi fanno la guerra....
l’accetto.

— ma vostro marito?....

— quando verrà gli faremo un po’ di posto. —

cenarono e risero.... ella gustò diversi calici di frontignano — aveva
il capriccio del frontignano, quella sera — egli non bevette che acqua
— ma quando s’alzarono l’ebbro era lui, ebbro dello spirito, delle
carissime imprudenze di lei, delle occhiate che gli parevan piene di
promesse.

— vedremo come finirà, — pensava — ma come può finire.... se, fra
qualche ora, i lumi si spegneranno e non so quando potrò rivederla?

ma a che cosa pensate....? — disse maddalena — datemi il braccio.

— pensava se e quando potrò rivedervi.

— ah!.... — ed ella chinò il capo.

— adesso potrei domandar io a che cosa pensate voi?

— pensava.... oh! dio! ma sentite....! che può mai essere accaduto....!
andate a vedere, vi prego.... v’aspetto qui.

                                 * * *

tutto a un tratto era nato un gran trambusto. chi correva di qua, chi
correva di là. chi gridava per sapere, chi, temendo vi fosse una rissa,
gridava per trattenere le signore curiose. dalla _salle-à-fumer_,
in cui non si poteva più entrare, tanta era la folla, uscivano
vociferazioni d’ogni genere: — indietro! — non soffochino! — non sarà
niente! — è morto! — ci vuol il prete! — no, è vivo....! ecco, si
muove! — portiamolo via!

— silenzio! — gridò finalmente una voce stentorea. era la voce di un
medico.

— lei, signor alessandri, — continuò — lo faccia portar qui sopra, in
casa sua, e mettere a letto. allora si potrà far qualche cosa! qui è
impossibile.

— benissimo.... largo, signori! —

si vide allora la gente rifluire e lasciar il passo a due soci, che
spingevano una gran poltrona verso la guardaroba....

in quella poltrona stava adagiato un uomo, che parava un cadavere.

                                 * * *

— ma che c’è? — domandava intanto maddalena a quelli che le passavan
vicino.

— non so, signora, non so davvero — rispondevano guardandola con
compassione; — oppure: — niente, niente! cose da nulla! — e via.

— ah! finalmente saprò da voi che cosa è avvenuto! — fece ella, vedendo
venire oreste tutto turbato e dolente.

— non ve l’hanno ancor detto?

— ma se nessuno sa niente!

— è perchè voglion risparmiarvi un dispiacere....

— un dispiacere? — e davanti all’ignoto ella non potè a meno
d’impallidire. — mio marito.... mio padre, forse?

— vi prego.... non mettetevi in apprensione. è una cosa che passerà....
vostro marito ha.... eh! insomma, non è un delitto poi!.... ha bevuto,
pare, un po’ troppo.... e ora....

— ah! tacete! — fe’ ella con moto di schifo, volgendo altrove il viso.

— ve l’avrei taciuto.... ma era mio dovere tranquillarvi....

— grazie.... e ora dov’è? voglio sperare che non me lo porteranno a
casa in quello stato....!

— no.... no; è già provveduto. il cassiere della società, che abita qui
al secondo piano, l’ha ritirato in casa sua. egli non tornerà quindi
presso di voi che quando sarà fuori di pericolo....

— v’è pericolo....? — e lo sguardo di maddalena, in dir questo, parve
strano ad oreste.

— no.... sapete bene....

— sì.... è vero, non capiva. — e io che cosa faccio adesso.... qui
sulla festa, quando tutti sanno che mio marito.... il presidente....?
ah! povera donna ch’io sono!.... che bella felicità la mia, non è
vero? — e ella rideva stridendo. — vedete.... vedete la gente come
mi guarda....! ah! io non posso più vedermi qui.... venite....?
m’accompagnate?

— andiamo.

— grazie.... ah! ricordatevi di levare le chiavi dal soprabito di mio
marito....; quasi quasi non ci pensava. —

in quel momento si attaccava un galoppo — e nessuno si avvide della
partenza della nostra coppia.... anche perchè seppe partir bene.

quando si venne a sapere che la _minella_ era andata via, ossia a casa
con soranzi....

— povera donna, — dissero i più. qualcuno sogghignò; e giulio disse
adirittura: — la poesia di soranzi la consolerà adesso della prosa di
poco fa del marito. —

                                 * * *

— possiamo andare a piedi, — disse maddalena, sulla soglia del portone,
guardando il cielo — la notte è così serena e così tiepida!

— badate a quello che fate....; la vostra salute potrebbe correre un
serio pericolo, uscendo da un ambiente tanto caldo.

— oh! sono ben coperta....; del resto, — aggiunse con amaro sorriso —
cosa importa che io viva o muoja....?

— non parlate così, maddalena.... — intanto andavano — sapete pure
che v’è qualcuno, il quale vive per voi, e sarebbe ben felice se
voi voleste viver per lui. — ma è forse questo che poco v’importa, e
perciò.... —

egli tacque, per una forte pressione del braccio di maddalena sul suo —
e la guardò.

ella si era sospesa, per così dire, a quel braccio, intrecciando
le mani — e lasciava trascinare la persona stanca. il di lei capo,
piegato verso il suo cavaliere, a gradi insensibili finì a reclinarsi
sulla spalla di lui. non parlava.... solo ad intervalli le sfuggiva
un sospiro. egli rispettava quel mesto silenzio, temendo che qualunque
parola di conforto, in tale stato dell’anima, potesse sembrarle volgare
e indisporla.

giunsero così all’angolo della via ove era l’abitazione di maddalena.

— dove siamo? — esclamò ella, come svegliandosi di soprassalto.

— qui.... presso casa vostra, — rispose egli dolcemente.

— casa mia?.... — fece maddalena fermandosi — e un gran sgomento le
si leggeva in viso. — ma io ho paura.... di casa mia! come troverei
riposo.... ora? qual notte sarà questa per me? e se pur potessi
dormire, sono io certa che non mi risveglierà.... ah! quale orrore!

— calmatevi, cara maddalena.... sentiamo.... che volete fare fino
all’alba....? comandate.

— mio dio.... io non so.... qualunque cosa, purchè io non mi trovi in
quelle stanze spaventose. —

seguì un lungo silenzio. il cuore batteva a oreste con tal violenza
che pareva volesse aprirsi una strada, e sentiva al cervello come una
fiumana di sangue che lo accecava.

capiva che era il momento di ardire, e temeva di rovinar tutto con una
parola mal detta.

ma non vi fu pericolo di rovinare nulla. maddalena, che guardava verso
una piazzetta poco lontana, disse ad un tratto:

— che cosa sono quei due lumi rossi....?

— sono i fanali di un _brougham_.

— ah! — fe’ ella pensosa, mordendosi un labbro.

oreste tremava come una foglia e sentiva le gambe piegarsi....;
ardì.... provossi a fare, come in isbaglio, un passo verso la
piazzetta, e non trovando resistenza.... continuò.

ella era più leggera di prima.

quando furono a dieci passi da quella carrozza, egli fece per parlare,
ma non potè articolare un solo accento....

allora s’ajutò con un gesto, un punto d’interrogazione, e le additò la
carrozza.

ella non ebbe nè un moto nè una parola.

— dove andiamo? — fe’ egli con voce soffocata.

— _dove volete_.... — rispose ella fiocamente.

oreste fu abbarbagliato, come per lampo improvviso, e vacillò....

— ma.... — balbettò egli — io non vorrei che voi.... agiste.... in un
momento di.... disperazione....

— io.... — rispose maddalena, aprendo le braccia con un moto spasmodico
di tutte le membra, parevo la madonna dei sette dolori — io non ho più
forze.... non posso più resistere.... — e singhiozzante appoggiossi a
lui come cadendo.

egli la sorresse, e mormorò:

— tu sei un angelo! — e aperse lo sportello.

                                 * * *

è uso di dir ad una donna: «tu sei un angelo», quando la vediamo
cadere dal cielo della mor....ale sul paradiso terrestre dell’amore....
_nostro_....; s’intende.

                                 * * *

il primo lunedì di quaresima si leggeva in un giornale:

«ieri abbiamo detto che il signor p. m. era scomparso, lasciando una
lettera, in cui manifestava la risoluzione di suicidarsi. pur troppo,
egli ha mandato ad effetto il suo tristo divisamento. il cadavere
del p. m. è stato rinvenuto stamane da alcuni contadini presso il
manicomio, entro una roggia. nel prossimo campo si sono trovati un
mantello e una bottiglia di _rhum_ quasi vuota. si capisce che lo
sventurato ha cercato nel liquore quel coraggio che gli mancava. —
pregati dai parenti, non ci occuperemo dei motivi che spinsero il
disgraziato al disperato passo.»


il p. m. era paolo minelli.




la catastrofe.


mercoledì grasso, ore 11 antimeridiane.

minelli solo sta facendo colazione.... la signora è ancora nella sua
camera.

compare il ragioniere tutto serio.

rag. (_grave_) buon giorno.

min. (_non senza inquietudine_) buon giorno.

rag. signor minelli.... io vengo a darle le mie dimissioni.

min. (_in piedi_) cosa dice?

rag. sì, le mie dimissioni.... perchè il decoro, la delicatezza, tutte,
insomma, le ragioni di un uomo d’onore m’impongono di ritirarmi da
un’amministrazione che va a male.

min. (_sedendo — con mal umore_) va a male.... va a male....

rag. vedendo che le mie rimostranze non la persuadevano molto....
vedendo che si continuava sempre col medesimo andazzo.... io ho preso
l’unica risoluzione che doveva prendere. non voglio che, un giorno, si
dica che io l’ho rovinato.... mentre ho fatto di tutto per salvarlo....
eccole lo stato della sua casa.... sono otto giorni che non prendo
quasi alcun riposo per far più presto.... perchè ho fretta d’andarmene.

min. (_tutto mortificato_) ah! ha fretta.... (_prende ed esamina
lo stato, senza batter ciglio, poi con voce semispenta_) e.... è
esatto?....

rag. pur troppo!

min. e.... non c’è più speranza di rifarsi?

rag. se si va avanti così.... nessuna speranza! — se, invece, si ha
il coraggio d’una riforma radicale.... sarei per garantire che si
tornerebbe alla floridezza primiera.

min. (_respirando_) pazienza.... quando mi parla così....

rag. (_lieto_) ho un progetto! se ella lo approva e lo mette a
esecuzione.... fra tre anni, forse prima. ella può essere ancora il
minelli d’una volta....

min. (_battendogli sulla spalla_) bravo.... ragioniere.... bravo!
sentiamo, sentiamo.

rag. un momento.... prima di pensare a progetti.... bisogna trovar
diecimila lire per far fronte alle scadenze di questo mese....

min. (_già scoraggiato_) diecimila lire.... dove vuol che le trovi io?

rag. sua moglie ha una dote....; se la faccia consegnare — (_ad una
smorfia di minelli)_. non si tratta di consumargliela.... si tratta
semplicemente di servirsene per salvare la situazione.... è un
interesse della moglie come del marito.

min. mi rincresce.... se vi fosse un altro mezzo....

rag. impossibile.... non si può già ricorrere agli strozzini.... senza
rovinarsi ancor più presto.

min. (_con sforzo_) bene.... adesso vado da mio suocero e mi faccio
dare le diecimila lire.... ella vada pure ad aspettarmi in negozio.....


ii.

mezz’ora dopo in casa papetti.

min. caro papà.... buon dì.

pap. to.... to...., che vuol dire a quest’ora?

min. vuol dire che ho bisogno d’un favore.

pap. ma parla subito...., che cosa vuoi?.... sono qui tutto per te!

min. ecco.... si tratterebbe.... anzi si tratta, mi hanno proposto una
operazione eccellente.... ma siccome, in questo momento non ho tutta
la somma che occorre.... sarei costretto a lasciarmela sfuggire.... se
invece potessi compire la somma.... allora io sarei certo di fare un
bel guadagno.

pap. (_con difficoltà_) e.... che somma occorrerebbe?

min. oh! solo diecimila lire....

pap. bagattelle!.... e dove vuoi che vada a prenderle io?

min. subito fatto.... tu.... un momento; prima voglio ricordarti una
cosa. quando io ti ho chiesto la mano di maddalena, e che si è parlato
d’interessi, io cosa t’ho detto?.... si goda.... — ho detto — allora ci
davamo del lei.... si goda pure, in pace, gli interessi delle diecimila
lire ch’ella mi offre in dote....; a me basta la sua maddalena.... è
inutile far contratti... denaro non ne ho bisogno.... parenti non ne
ho...., dunque.... quel ch’è mio è suo e nessuno glielo può togliere.

pap. (_che ha capito l’antifona, comincia a far il muso lungo_)

min. ho io mai pensato a farmi consegnar la dote di maddalena?....
no. — ma adesso mi è necessaria.... e vengo a chiedertela.... del
resto, non temere.... quel che t’ho detto allora, te lo mantengo — gli
interessi li godrai sempre tu!

pap. (_freddo_) senti.... io i denari non li ho.... cioè.... li ho,
ma non sono in contanti. io ho impiegato quella somma in tanta rendita
dello stato.

min. oh! non importa.... venderemo la rendita....

pap. dimmi un po’.... che operazione è.... che vuoi fare....? non
avertene a male.... sai.... capisci bene.... un padre.... vedi.... se
tu m’avesti detto allora....: — voglio la rendita — figurati.... te
l’aveva offerta io! ma venir proprio adesso.... che cosa vuoi....; avrò
torto.... sarà una paura sciocca la mia.... ma abbi pazienza.

min. (_contenendosi_) dunque non me la dai....

pap. abbi pazienza.... ti ripeto...... non posso.

min. (_contenendosi_) senti.... sono venuto a chiedere un favore....
ma.... in fine dei conti, quelle diecimila lire mi appartengono....,
sono roba mia.

pap. (_convinto_) scusa, caro.... sono roba di maddalena!

min. accettato! e se maddalena ti dicesse: — dagliele pure? —

pap. risponderei....: alla nostra morte, avrà quello e anche il
resto.... ma ora, no.

min. ma e se per cagion tua.... io dovessi lasciarmi sfuggire
quell’operazione....?

pap. (_adulandolo_) eh! un negoziante come te.... ha credito fin che
ne vuole.... e non saranno proprio quelle povere diecimila lire che gli
faranno caldo piuttosto che freddo.

min. (_alterandosi_) questa poi non me l’aspettava.

pap. (_freddo_) e neanch’io.

min. ma per bacco!....

pap. che cosa?

min. (_mutando pensiero_) niente....

pap. bravo....

min. ne farò a meno.... e così vedrai che hai avuto torto di diffidar
di me.

pap. (_con espansione_) e io non desidero di meglio, anima mia!....


iii.

nel negozio minelli, dialogo a bassa voce.

rag. (_sentito l’insuccesso di minelli_) diavolo.... diavolo!....
(_pensa_) e dica un po’.... se si potesse ottenere dal signor papetti
che prestasse il suo _avallo_ sur una cambiale?.... che ne dice?....
chi sa.... alle volte, si hanno delle difficoltà a metter fuori il
denaro.... e si mette fuori invece, per far un favore, la propria
firma. a noi servirebbe egualmente, perchè io ho un amico il quale ha
la più grande fiducia in me.... e mi sconterebbe certamente....

min. e sconti senza l’avallo.... allora!

rag. ah! no.... ella mi capisce.... io voglio essere perfettamente
tranquillo....

min. (_rassegnato_) bene.... gliene parlerò.

rag. ma.... badi.... bisogna far in modo da non metterlo in sospetto.

min. lasci fare a me.... per stasera lo invito alla nostra festa....
e lo faccio bere un pochino.... siccome è molto espansivo, quando ha
bevuto...., otterrò da lui tutto quello che voglio.... mi prepari la
cambiale intanto.

                             . . . . . . .

il nessun successo della povera astuzia di minelli con papetti s’è
visto e sarebbe stato prevedibile per tutt’altri che per quell’uomo
scervellato.

invece a lui parve tanto impossibile di non esser riuscito, se ne
addolorò, si indispettì talmente contro sè stesso, che, per poter
non pensare alla propria disfatta.... per poter dimenticare, fino
al domani, quelle diecimila lire.... vuotò la bottiglia del cipro.
ma non bastò, anzi fu peggio.... perchè, cominciata l’ebbrezza,
quelle maledette cifre, presa forma umana, si misero a ballonzargli
e sgambettargli negli atteggiamenti più grotteschi, nella mente
trasognata — or irridendolo coi più strani sberleffi, or minacciandolo
coi pugni e coi denti.... non sapendo più come salvarsi.... si fece
portare una bottiglia di erlauer.... poi, un’altro ancora.

allora le cifre scomparvero — tutto dintorno a lui diventò bujo
— gli parve d’essere sul tetto d’una casa, nelle acque d’un fiume
straripato.... e il terribile elemento saliva.... saliva.... e il vento
muggiva, e la pioggia scrosciava.... e nessuno veniva a salvarlo....
e l’acqua gli lambiva già i piedi.... allora sentì un guizzo di freddo
per tutta la persona, volle alzarsi.... e sconciamente stramazzò.


iv.

giovedì grasso, ore 9 antimeridiane.

minelli si sveglia e chiama, senza aprir gli occhi.

— lena..... lena.... — nessuno risponde — dormi ancora?.... ma.... — si
leva a sedere, si stropiccia gli occhi, si guarda d’intorno.... non è
la sua camera.... non è la sua casa.... si ricorda.

— pover uomo! — balbuzia — pover uomo! chi sa cosa avrà detto
maddalena.... chi sa! —

poi pensando ai casi suoi:

— quella è l’ultima.... ah! sì.... è tempo di finirla....; or vado a
casa.... e da questo momento.... vita nuova! —

forte della buona risoluzione, si sente bene e sarebbe quasi felice....
se non fosse il pensiero martellante delle diecimila lire e dei
rimproveri che lo attendono al domicilio conjugale.

— ma passerà anche questa! — dice e si alza. dà la mancia al servo del
cassiere della società, e gli lascia tante scuse con tante cose pel
padrone e la promessa d’una visita, dopo pranzo.

torna a casa, ma trova chiuso. la fantesca è uscita ed egli non ha le
chiavi. scende e entra in negozio, il che, a quell’ora, maraviglia i
garzoni. parla col ragioniere, gli dice del secondo fiasco toccato con
papetti e finisce coll’esclamare: — cosa facciamo adesso?

— ci penserò! — risponde il ragioniere, che ha già pensato, con un
accento che fa sperare ancora una speranza.

— bene.... io sono nelle sue mani. ah! ecco la domestica che
ritorna....; vado a vedere se mia moglie s’è svegliata. ella venga
pure, verso mezzogiorno.

                                 * * *

mezzodì.

minelli entra nel salotto, in cui v’è già il ragioniere ad aspettarlo.

il povero marito non è gajo. la moglie era di pessimo umore, e alle sue
scuse e spiegazioni non ha risposto che un: — taci, taci. — quanto alla
conferenze, l’ha accettata con un annojatissimo: — sì, sì. —

min. favorisca aspettare un momento.... mia moglie sta vestendosi.

rag. l’ha prevenuta?

min. sì.... le ho detto a un dipresso....

rag. e cosa ha risposto?.... è bene ch’io sappia in quali
disposizioni....

min. eccola.... — entra maddalena e saluta freddamente. siedono.

rag. signora minelli.... mi rincresce di averla forse disturbata, ma
era necessario. dovendo presentare la situazione finanziaria del signor
minelli.... ho desiderato che ella pure ne prendesse conoscenza....
sia perchè si tratta di cosa che deve starle molto a cuore.... sia
perchè, occorrendo poscia adottar dei provvedimenti pel seguito, e la
di lei cooperazione potendo essere assai utile.... è bene ch’ella sia
perfettamente informata di tutto. —

maddalena corruga la fronte — non ha capito niente, cioè ha capito che
è un brutto preambolo.

rag. (_con solennità_) ecco adunque lo stato, in poche cifre tonde. la
dimostrazione l’avrà poi se la desidererà:

l’attivo è composto, in gran parte, delle spese sostenute in questi
ultimi ventun mesi.

  per ammobiliare l’appartamento            l.  15,000
  per le gioje della signora                »    9,000
  fatture saldate per conto della signora   »   14,000
  simili per conto del signore              »    4,000
  spese di famiglia                         »   25,000
  mobili di negozio                         »   10,000
  crediti diversi                           »   23,000
  merci esistenti                           »   40,000
                                           ———————————
                                  totale   l.  140,000

passivo:

  scadenze di marzo                         l.  10,000
     »     di aprile                        »    4,000
     »     di maggio                        »    6,000
                                            ——————————
                                  totale    l.  20,000

se vi siano altre fatture da pagare per loro conto non so.

la posizione non è disperata, ma bisogna mutar sistema per salvarla. i
provvedimenti da prendersi sono varj:

i. depurazione del personale. — la rendita di questi ventun mesi basta
appena alle spese di negozio e alle sottrazioni fatte da qualcuno, che
si dovrà licenziare. i colpevoli restarono al coperto per molto tempo,
ma finalmente si tradirono in questo carnevale, colle loro pazze spese.

ii. vigilanza continua del signor minelli.

iii. bisogna tornare alla cifra normale di l. 80,000 circa, pel conto
merci generali, tanto richiedendo l’importanza del negozio.

iv. estinguere le passività.

le diecimila lire scadenti in aprile e in maggio verranno colle
vendite. le merci che arriveranno in sostituzione non saranno pagabili
che in novembre e in dicembre.

in giornata, urge trovare le diecimila lire di marzo. sono
indispensabili, una condizione _sine qua non_ dell’assestamento
degli affari. si sarebbe potuto provvedervi facilmente se il signor
papetti fosse stato più arrendevole....; così, non resta a nostra
disposizione che un mezzo solo.... lecito e non rovinoso. la signora
vorrà permettere che si diano in pegno le sue gioje.... (moto di
spiacevole sorpresa della moglie — e anche del marito) per qualche
tempo. m’incarico io di cavarne almeno l. 7000....; per le altre 3000,
supplirò io coi miei piccoli risparmj.... —

minelli, con ammirazione, rasserenandosi, alla moglie: — ma vedi....
vedi che uomo! e se si presta lui, che cosa non dobbiamo far noi?!

— rimane a prendersi un ultimo provvedimento, dal quale io mi
riprometto vantaggi grandissimi, più che da ogni altra misura (fissa
sorridendo, maddalena), ed è questo: la signora dovrebbe compiacersi di
passare almeno sei ore al giorno, al banco del negozio....

min. (_incerto_) come....?

madd. (_sdegnosa_) io?....

rag. scusi, signora,... io ho pensato che la di lei presenza in bottega
contribuirebbe a ristabilire la disciplina nel personale — ed essendo
anche un bellissimo e nuovo ornamento del negozio, contribuirebbe,
altresì, a richiamare gli avventori disgustati, non solo, ma a farne
accorrere di nuovi. qual più bella soddisfazione per la signora
che quella di poter dire un giorno: — ecco, casa minelli è risorta
all’antico splendore.... e questo è tutto opera mia!?.... —

la cosa può sembrarle forse un po’ nojosa al momento.... ma ci si
abitua presto, e col tempo diventa un divertimento. si tratta poi di
così poche ore.... che si può fare un piccolo sacrificio.... già, senza
mortificazioni non si può aspirare neanche al paradiso....

madd. (_insensibile ai sorrisi, alle delicatezze, alle adulazioni e
agli scherzi del ragioniere — con stizza mal dissimulata_) io non
discuto le proposte del signor ragioniere, anzi dico anch’io che
sono buone.... e quindi farò anch’io tutto quello che potrò, perchè è
troppo giusto. le mie gioje sono a sua disposizione.... fin da questo
momento.... vuole anche i miei abiti....?

rag. (_grave_) signora.... ella mi offende.... si direbbe quasi che
io....

min. (_spaventato, supplice_) per carità, maddalena!.... signor
ragioniere!....

madd. se ho esagerato.... è stato involontariamente.... mi perdoni....
ma non avevo proprio l’intenzione di offenderla.... dunque.... farò
il mio dovere.... ma ch’io scenda in negozio.... questo è proprio
impossibile.... che vuole.... che io me ne stia là, come una civetta
per attirar la gente? so che si usa, ma a me ripugna....

min. bene, bene! lasciamo questo punto. io devo già ringraziare
maddalena del sacrificio ch’è disposta a fare. sta pur certa che le
gioje torneranno a casa il più presto possibile. quanto a richiamar gli
avventori, ci penserò io.... anche senza esporre mia moglie....

rag. signora, io spero che ella non mi terrà il broncio....

madd. le pare? io devo anzi ringraziarla per tutte le sue premure....
posso andarmene adesso?

min. fa pure, cara...., e noi scendiamo.... (_mentre si levano, si ode
la voce della fantesca domandare dal di fuori_) — è permesso?

min. avanti.

fant. (_aprendo_) v’è qui un giovane, che desidera parlare colla
signora.

madd. con me?

min. sarà qualche operajo....; fallo pure venire innanzi.

fant. (_introduce un cameriere d’albergo e si ritira_)

madd. (_vedendo il cameriere, impallidisce come un cadavere_)

cam. (_s’inchina, poi tutto grazioso a maddalena:_) sono molto contento
d’averla trovata in casa.... dica.... avrebbe mai, per accidente,
smarrito il suo ventaglio, stanotte?

madd. (_non ancora riavutasi_) io?....

min. (_al cameriere_) scusi.... lei chi è?....

madd. (_tenta far comprendere al cameriere, cogli occhi, i quali pare
voglian schizzar dalle orbite, che non deve parlare — ma quello non
vede_)

cam. io sono un cameriere del _restaurant bouquet_. siccome abbiamo
trovato un ventaglio nel gabinetto in cui la signora.... (_guarda in
viso a maddalena, e vedendone la terribile espressione, s’interrompe
tutto confuso_)

min. (_sorpreso per quel silenzio subitaneo, dopo tal principio,
vedendo il turbamento del cameriere e di maddalena_) e così....?
finisci.... (_poi al ragioniere, che, per delicatezza, vorrebbe
andarsene_) si fermi pure....

cam. (_con sforzo_) probabilmente m’hanno mal diretto....

min. (_colpito da sospetto a maddalena studiandola_) dov’è il ventaglio
che avevi ieri sera?....

madd. (_sconcertata, non trova parole, dice col gesto che non sa_)

min. (_scoppiando_) ah! ma dunque è vero!.... (_al cameriere,
imperioso_) finisci quello che avevi incominciato....; guardami bene in
faccia!

cam. (_asciugandosi la fronte, balbetta_) siccome.... si è trovato un
ventaglio....

min. in un gabinetto!

cam. sì, signore.

min. che la signora vi ha lasciato.... stanotte.

madd. (_rompendo in pianto, grida_) ma non è vero!.... questa è
un’infamia!....

cam. (_dice fra sè_) apriti terra!

min. (_lancia alla moglie un’occhiata fulminante, quindi al cameriere_)
dammi quel ventaglio....

cam. (_la cui mano, involontariamente, s’era mossa nella direzione
d’una tasca, preso da pietà per maddalena, dice:_) non l’ho....

min. (_frenandosi a stento_) ah! non l’hai?....

cam. (_con sicurezza_) no.... è all’albergo....

min. (_coi denti serrati, facendo un passo_) ah! all’albergo?....

cam. (_indietreggiando_) sì, signore.

min. bene! verremo all’albergo.... e ora dimmi un po’...., come mai t’è
venuto in mente di venir.... precisamente qua?.... (_moto disperato di
maddalena_) zitta tu!.... se parli.... io....

madd. (_che ha preso una risoluzione, con subitanea energia_) ma,
insomma.... è una vera indecenza.... questa, che si vada in una
casa.... e che....

min. (_interrompendola_) t’ho detto di non parlare!.... (_freddo_) non
è un’indecenza.... è onestà.... e siccome questa onestà dà una traccia
di qualche cosa.... appunto d’indecente.... così io voglio saper
tutto.... e lo saprò.

madd. (_sedendo, disdegnosa_) va benissimo.

min. (_al cameriere_) dimmi, adunque, come t’è venuto in mente....

cam. ecco, se si fosse trattato d’un ventaglio qualunque, non ce
ne saremmo curati.... ma trattandosi d’un ventaglio di valore....
capisce.... allora io, che aveva veduto il cocchiere del _brougham_....
(_esita_)

min. (_fremente_).... in cui la signora era venuta....

cam. .... questo non so.... sapeva solo che aveva condotto gente....
quindi sono andato da lui....

min. (_tremante d’impazienza_) e t’ha detto?

cam. (_esitante_) e.... m’ha detto.... che s’era...., ossia che gli
pareva d’essersi fermato davanti a questa casa....

min. (_colla vista oscurata_) e allora?

cam. allora.... ho interrogato il portinajo.... e m’ha detto che,
della casa, la signora minelli, per quanto egli ne sapeva, era l’unica
signora che la scorsa notte fosse uscita.... con suo marito. o il
cocchiere era ubbriaco.... o il portinajo era mal informato....

min. (_con riso spaventevole_) sicuro.... dev’essere così....
(_fregandosi le mani e guardando maddalena_) ora, adunque, andremo
all’albergo a prendere il ventaglio.... e se non ci sarà.... se ne
vedranno delle belline.... va bene?....

cam. (_stanco, volendo uscirne, senz’altri rischi nè noje_) senta....
poichè devo darglielo.... o prima o poi.... tanto fa che glielo dia
adesso....; dopo tutto, non sono cose che mi riguardano.... (_gli dà un
involtino. maddalena non sembra accorgersi di quanto avviene; pensa_)

min. (_frenando un grido di furore al riconoscere il ventaglio, con
orgasmo al cameriere_) bravo.... così si fa.... a te.... per il tuo
incomodo.... prendi (_gli dà cinque lire; aggiungendo con intenzione
minacciosa_), e se sarai discreto.... farai una buona azione....
capisci?....

cam. non dubiti.... grazie.... riverisco (_s’inchina ed esce_).

rag. (_contristato_) permetta che me ne vada anch’io?....

min. no.... si fermi.... si fermi...., perchè questa donna sa
mentire.... e può essere che io abbia bisogno di testimonj....

madd. (_alzandosi, fredda al ragioniere_) ha sentito?.... mio marito
m’insulta.... ora io non voglio più restare in questa casa.... (_muove
per uscire_)

min. (_vietandole il passo, furente_) non si parte....
(_respingendola_) non si parte.... per dio!

madd. (_al ragioniere, con riso forzato_) ma sa che questa è nuova....
(_siede_)

min. (_la guarda torvamente, poi suona il campanello; entra la
fantesca_) a che ora è venuta a casa mia moglie.... stamattina?

fant. (_incerta_) alle....

madd. (_pronta_) alla una!

min. (_contenendosi, ripete con flemma_) a che ora è venuta a casa mia
moglie?

fant. (_che ha capito_) l’ha già detto la signora.... alla una.

min. (_urlando_) tu menti.... tutti mentite! ma.... la saprò ben io....
per l’inferno.... la verità.... quel cocchiere.... è ancora vivo!....
(_battendo un gran colpo sul tavolo_) lo troverò....!

fant. (_spaventata si ritira_)

madd. (_a quelle parole, si perde d’animo, supplice_) ma dio! un po’ di
pietà!

min. (_stravolto_) con chi sei andata a quel _restaurant_.... con chi?

madd. (_mancando_) ma io non sono andata in alcun restaurant.

min. a che ora sei partita dalla festa....?

madd. che so io.... alla una.

min. sola.... no già!.... con chi adunque?

madd. con una persona.... che conosci anche tu.... e che io stessa ho
pregata d’accompagnarmi.

min. e.... chi è.... questa persona....?

madd. è il signor soranzi....

min. e.... siete venuti a casa.... subito?

madd. .... subito....

min. a piedi?

madd. a piedi....

min. (_al ragioniere_) ella ha sentito.... (_a maddalena_) ora.... io
esco.... e se io saprò.... che hai mentito.... guai.... guai a te! e se
poi il ventaglio sarà stato smarrito.... supponiamo.... sulla festa....
resterà a scoprire qual è la signora che l’ha trovato.... e riusciremo
a sapere anche questo.... va bene? (_al ragioniere_) ella intanto
mi faccia il favore di rimanere.... e le impedisca di parlare con
chicchessia e di fare un sol passo.... siamo intesi! (_esce_)

madd. (_vedendosi sola col ragioniere, riprende coraggio, e fingendosi
oppressa, con voce flebile_) scusi, signore.... se mi ritiro nella mia
camera.... ma io ho troppo bisogno di piangere....

rag. mi faccia la grazia di restar qui. ella ha udito le
raccomandazioni....

madd. (_piangendo_) ma sono in casa mia, infine....! mi segua, se
vuole.... mi lasci andare nella mia camera....

rag. (_con pietà_) mi dica.... ella è proprio innocente....?

madd. .... creda.... io sono una povera vittima del destino, che mi
perseguita.... ma io non so proprio nulla di nulla! mi crede?

rag. ma.... per me.... si figuri....

madd. .... dunque.... sia buono.... guardi.... mi lasci almeno
rinfrescarmi il volto.... devo avere gli occhi ben rossi....

rag. bene.... faccia presto.... perchè io non voglio aver noje....

madd. (_dolcissima_) un minuto solo.... (_esce_)

il ragioniere resta solo, facendo delle considerazioni morali sul
matrimonio, e rallegrandosi di essersi conservato celibe; tutt’a
un tratto balza in piedi esterrefatto, ha udito un rumore di chiavi
giranti nelle toppe; corre ad un uscio, — chiuso — corre all’altro, —
chiuso anch’esso. — ah! balordo ch’io sono.... — esclama — doveva ben
pensare che una donna....! e adesso quell’altro tornerà.... ed io....
ah! bah! — corre alla finestra, apre, e grida: — portinajo! portinajo!

eh? — fa il portinajo sull’uscio del suo stambugio....

— vieni su.... subito....

— subito....

— ma dov’è? — domanda forte il portinajo, salito, girando per le camere.

— qui.... qui! — grida il ragioniere — apri....

— ecco.... ma come mai....

fuori di sè. — niente.... di’ al signor minelli che io non sono nè
un gendarme nè un aguzzino.... e tanto meno poi un prigioniere.... il
resto glielo scriverò io....!

— va benone! — fa il portinajo, che non capisce niente, vedendolo
fuggire a precipizio. — il marito se ne va, la moglie se ne va, la
serva se ne va.... e questi, non appena può andare, scappa.... così,
chiudiamo e andiamocene anche noi. —

                                 * * *

sono scorse due ore. minelli torna. ha cercato di tutti quelli che
potevano fornire qualche schiarimento e ha parlato con tutti.... col
cocchiere, col portinajo di casa soranzi, coi servitori della società,
ha voluto rivedere il cameriere del _restaurant_.

non v’è una dissonanza. tutto concorre ad accertare in modo ormai
incontrastabile la temuta verità. ebbene, egli non è più furente....
è di ghiaccio. — egli non ha da far altro che strozzare maddalena....
e la strozzerà; e dopo andrà a consegnarsi alla giustizia. — questo è
così semplice, che egli è tranquillo. — si è sempre tranquilli quando
si compie il proprio dovere.

il portinajo, vedendo passare il signor minelli: — signor minelli, ha
detto il di lei ragioniere che non è nè un gendarme, nè un aguzzino....
e tanto meno poi un prigioniere. quindi se n’è andato.

min. (_accendendosi_) e dove è andato?

port. io non saprei.... ah! prenda la chiave....; non v’è nessuno in
casa.

min. (_afferrandolo per un braccio, come pazzo_) cosa dici! non c’è
nessuno?....

port. (_liberandosi_) se non crede.... vada a vedere. — che cos’ha?....
si sente male?

min. (_atterrato, cupo_) no.... grazie. —

sale lentamente, curvo, barcollante, apre, entra, passa di camera in
camera, con tal circospezione, che si direbbe tema di trovar alcuno.
giunge alla camera da letto.... vorrebbe.... si pente.... si decide....
spinge l’uscio.

— ah! — grida gemendo — son rovinato! —

al primo sguardo, egli ha tutta compresa la sua disgrazia.

non gli resta nemmeno il conforto della vendetta.

corre al forziere aperto.... pur troppo è vero.... l’unico valore che
vi si trovava, lo scrignetto dei giojelli, è sparito.

sur un tavolino v’è un biglietto scritto colla matita in modo quasi
inintelligibile, tanta era la furia di chi lo vergò.

ecco quel che vi legge minelli coll’occhio semispento:

  «non cercare di me.... non mi troveresti. addio per sempre.

                                                       «maddalena.»

minelli alza gli occhi e i pugni al cielo.... la sua maledizione non si
ode.... ma deve essere orrenda!

poi biascica sordamente:

— ah!.... non cercare di te?... addio per sempre?.... voglio
trovarti.... voglio.... capisci? —

vuol muoversi, per uscire, ma le gambe non lo reggono.... tutto è
distrutto in lui e cade inginocchioni. egli vuol rialzarsi.... e non
può.... si rode i pugni per la rabbia, si percuote il petto, la fronte,
si strascina sulle ginocchia.... ma ogni sforzo è vano.

il portinajo, che s’era impensierito pei modi strani di minelli, sale
dopo mezz’ora e lo trova immobile, accosciato, cogli occhi sbarrati,
fissi al suolo, colla bocca intrisa di una spuma verdognola e
sanguigna.

— lo diceva io che ci doveva essere qualche cosa — borbotta il
portinajo, e lo solleva e lo mette a giacere sul letto, e gli domanda
che cosa ha, che desidera....

— nulla — mormora minelli estenuato — lasciami dormire; va pure.

— vuol che dorma qui nella camera vicina, stanotte?

— no, no, adesso mi è passato.... grazie.

— e l’uscio che è aperto....?

— lascia pure aperto... non c’è pericolo.... chiuderò io.... il negozio
non sarà aperto.... m’imagino....

— eh! già.... è giovedì grasso....

— giovedì grasso.... — sospira minelli. — va pure.... addio. —

                                 * * *

quando il mattino susseguente, il portinajo salì per veder come stava
il signor minelli, non lo trovò più.

sul tavolo, nel salotto, v’era un piego suggellato diretto al
ragioniere.




                _lettera di minelli al suo ragioniere._

      caro amico,

  permetta che, in questi ultimi momenti, riconosca quanto ella ha
  fatto o tentato di fare per me, col chiamarla amico. se io le
  avessi dato retta, sarei certamente felice e degno della stima
  generale.... così sono un povero miserabile.

  non lo sarò tuttavia che per poche ore.

  cosa vuol che ne faccia io, adesso, della mia vita?

  si può vivere soli, coll’anima esulcerata; impotenti a tutto, colla
  mente che non sa obliare.... sapendo che _ella_ è viva, che mi
  disonora, che mi deride.... perchè le è riescito di ingannarmi e di
  derubarmi?!

  d’altronde sono rovinato, caro ragioniere, e non saprei come
  rialzarmi, perchè io non sono più capace di lavorare.... lo sento.

  e poi, ho sempre veduto che quando si comincia a rotolar giù, non
  si può proprio più fermarsi.

  dunque arrischierei di perdere quel poco che ancor mi resta, mentre
  è mio dovere sacrosanto di salvarlo per mia figlia?

  no.... no.... ne ho già troppe sulla coscienza, e almeno questa
  voglio risparmiarmela.

  povera silvia!.... non l’ho mai riveduta....

  questo è forse il più grave mio torto.... e non ho scuse.... non
  posso a meno di piangere pensando a quella meschina....

  desidero che ella, signor ragioniere, sia il tutore di mia figlia
  — e se ella accetta, io dico, anzi: _voglio_, affinchè ella possa
  venir più facilmente nominato dal tribunale.

  forse ci sono molte altre cose che sarebbe necessario dire.... ma
  or non saprei.... ah! _è mia assoluta volontà_ che quanto potrà
  essere salvato dal naufragio della mia fortuna, venga investito
  in rendita pubblica e intestato a mia figlia. tutto in rendita,
  ad eccezione di poche lire 3000, tremila, che io la prego, signor
  ragioniere, di accettare come un lieve segno della mia gratitudine
  pei servigi che ella mi ha resi.

  non ho proprio altro ad aggiungere.

  parli qualche volta di me alla silvia, quando potrà capire.... e la
  baci per me.

  addio.

                                                     paolo minelli.

  _ps._ favorisca far consegnare le unite due lettere — e faccia
  dir una parola ai giornali, onde non si occupino di me.... se pur
  possono defraudare, in via d’eccezione, una volta la curiosità
  dei loro lettori. non è tanto per me che desidero questo, quanto
  per mia figlia, che un giorno saprà leggere.... e vorrà sapere...
  addio, addio.

                                 * * *

                   _lettera al padre di mia moglie._

  voleva quasi quasi partire, senza neanche salutarti — ma siccome,
  sebbene involontariamente, sei stato la cagione principale di tutto
  quello che è avvenuto — perchè se non mi avessi rifiutato quanto
  mi _devi_, nulla sarebbe avvenuto.... così voglio salutarti.... e
  ringraziarti.

  l’ho qui.... qui alla gola.... veh! — e non mi passa.... e se io
  ascoltassi solo la mia rabbia....

  ma, per dio! vengo a domandarti la mano di tua figlia.... e non
  ti chiedo un soldo — la adoro tua figlia, la tratto come una
  principessa, non so cosa farei per vederla sempre sorridere di
  soddisfazione.... procuro ad un padre una rara consolazione e la
  più grande, quella di veder felice sua figlia.... ed ecco il bel
  compenso che trovo!

  un giorno, quando per un concorso di circostanze, e anche per mia
  colpa — sì, non lo nego! — mi trovo in bisogno e mi rivolgo al
  padre di mia moglie.... egli mi lascerebbe morire piuttosto che
  ajutarmi! mi nega il _prestito_ di diecimila lire che mi deve....
  me lo nega a me, che ho speso quattro, cinque volte tanto in pochi
  mesi per far star allegra sua figlia! è dura, sai?! è proprio una
  cosa che grida vendetta in cielo!

  e sua figlia, tanto per fare ancor qualche cosa di meglio di suo
  padre, mi tradisce, mi deruba.... e fugge!

  ma me la sono meritata!

  cosa mi è mai venuto in mente, dopo essere stato felice venti anni
  — cosa straordinaria — con una donna, di prendere moglie per la
  seconda volta.... per avere una donna bella?! — prendila, paolo, la
  donna bella.... prendila! — ecco il bel frutto.

  ma chi poteva imaginarselo? chi?

  e pazienza ancora, se le avessi fatto imporre di sposarmi....!
  ma ha avuto tutta la libertà d’agire come sentiva! perchè non
  rispondermi francamente un _no_? imbecille ch’io fui!.... credetti
  che il suo fosse un _sì_ d’amore.... ed invece, non era che una
  furberia per poter venire a godersi il mio denaro!

  ed io.... mi sono rovinato per questa donna!

  basta.... io adesso me ne vado all’altro mondo, e spero che tu non
  starai molto a seguirmi.

  intanto godi.... godi le tue, ossia le mie diecimila lire! — e
  quanto a tua figlia, ora trionfi pure.... ma la mia maledizione la
  perseguiterà per tutta la vita.... e qualche giorno giustizia sarà
  fatta!

                                         _il marito di tua figlia._

                                 * * *

                  _lettera di oreste ai suoi parenti._

      miei cari,

  spero che v’avranno subito consegnato jeri il biglietto, in cui vi
  diceva che io doveva assentarmi per una partita di piacere.

  mi sono assentato.... ma per ben altro motivo. non ve l’ho detto
  jeri, perchè, a dirvi tutto, ci voleva tempo, e urgeva partire
  senza il menomo indugio. il più importante era che foste tranquilli
  a mio riguardo.

  eccovi ora la verità.

  una donna mi aveva inspirato una profonda passione e la ricambiava.

  jeri, il marito, messo da qualcuno in sospetto di tale mistero,
  interrogò la moglie, che, naturalmente, negò, chiedendo le prove,
  per guadagnar tempo. — vado a procurarmele, disse il marito
  furente, e se sarà vero, io ti ucciderò. — non appena il marito
  fu uscito, la moglie — doveva forse aspettare che ritornasse
  con quelle prove, che pur troppo si potevano ottenere? — corse
  dalla persona, presso la quale soltanto poteva trovare rifugio e
  difesa.... venne da me. era alla disperazione! se l’aveste veduta,
  avrebbe mosso a compassione una tigre....

  prego mio padre e la mia buona madre di non esser troppo severi.

  so anch’io.... come lo sa _lei_, che legge mentre vi scrivo....
  tutto quello che si può dire. ma non discutete, per carità, la
  ragione o il torto d’una passione! ditemi solo se un uomo che
  si trovava nella mia posizione ha fatto o no il suo dovere,
  accogliendo questa povera donna, che tutto aveva prima arrischiato
  ed ora ha tutto perduto per lui! — su questo solo punto siate
  giusti.... il resto lo abbandono all’indulgenza di gente di cuore,
  la quale sa che cos’è vita, che cos’è giovinezza.

  mia madre sarà addoloratissima nel leggere queste righe, lo so....;
  crederà che io abbia smarrito quei sentimenti d’onestà che ella mi
  ha sempre inspirati.... no, io non sono stato che amante.

  d’altronde, v’era qualche cosa di predestinato.... era scritto che
  presto o tardi le nostre sorti dovessero confondersi in una sola,
  che sarà fonte perenne di comune felicità. lo sento.... e sono
  certo che non è un’illusione.

  siamo a x.... al confine.

  scrivetemi subito per tranquillarmi.

  il nostro ritorno dipende dagli avvenimenti.

  in caso di separazione legale, torneremo presto.... nel caso
  contrario, verrò a vedervi il più sovente possibile.

  sono felice.... ma solo per metà, lontano da voi, lo sapete.

                                              _vostro aff._ oreste.

                                 * * *

                        _risposta dei parenti._

      oreste,

  tu ci hai arrecato il più profondo dolore!

  tu non vuoi che si discuta la ragione o il torto della passione
  — ma un _uomo_ non deve ridursi fino al punto da mettersi
  volontariamente al livello dei bruti, pei quali non v’è ragione nè
  torto.

  quando, al primo riveder quella donna, tu sentisti ridestarsi
  l’antico affetto — dovevi fuggirla. era già moglie.

  il sacrifizio allora sarebbe stato ben lieve, credilo!

  non hai avuto quella meschinissima forza.... e or vedi le
  conseguenze orribili della tua debolezza!

  al solo pensarvi v’è da raccapricciare....

  quel marito s’è ucciso!.... ucciso per causa vostra.

  la donna che tu ami è l’oggetto della esecrazione generale in
  questo momento.

  essa non aveva alcuna ragione di mancare alla fede giurata.... dopo
  un anno e mezzo di matrimonio!

  l’opinione pubblica è meno severa per te.... ma, per la gente ben
  pensante, tu sei responsabile quanto colei, di quell’omicidio,
  perchè siete voi due che l’avete commesso.... negalo un po’ se hai
  tanto coraggio!

  leggi, leggi la lettera che lo sventurato ti ha scritto sul punto
  di morire, e poscia abbi ancora stima di lei.... di te.... se lo
  puoi!

  e ora che farai?.... sposerai tu quella donna? la tua passione ti
  trascinerà anche a questo? sarai tanto cieco da non veder che v’è
  un cadavere fra voi....?

  e quando l’avrai sposata, sarà essa veramente tua? e un giorno non
  sarai forse trascinato ad imitare l’esempio del primo marito?

  basta.... fa quel che vuoi. noi ti abbandoniamo a te stesso.

  io ti dico solo che in questi giorni io devo benedire la sventura
  che m’ha quasi affatto privato della vista.... perchè così io sono
  certo di non veder quella donna, se mai osasse venir in questa
  casa....; ma non l’oserà, perchè nessuno oserà condurvela.

                                               tuo padre ha dettato

                                           tua madre ha scritto — e
  aggiunge che stima troppo suo figlio per poter supporre, un solo
  istante, che egli le mancherà di rispetto.

                                 * * *

                 _lettera di minelli a oreste soranzi._

      signore,

  come vede, io mi ritiro. a lei piace mia moglie.... ed io gliela
  cedo. ma cosa vuole di più?!

  sia certo che le faccio un bel regalo.

  ella la conosce per una bella donna, ma forse non sa che è anche
  una buona donna. in tal caso, se ne persuaderà in seguito....

  poi, ha altre belle qualità: sa mangiar bene, bever meglio, veste
  con un gusto eccellente. a ballare, l’ha vista.... anzi l’ha fatta
  anche ballare.... per spirito non ha l’uguale. nè questo è tutto.
  ha un cuor d’oro. basta dire che ha avuto una figlia e che non
  ha ancor avuto tempo di vederla.... ma è sempre tanto occupata,
  poverina!

  io le ho scoperte, un po’ tardi, tutte queste perfezioni.... ma io
  sono un imbecille.

  credo che ella sarà molto felice con maddalena, perchè è una donna
  che sa fare.

  se mai, per caso, un giorno si stancherà, non le darà alcun
  disturbo, prenderà il bello e il buono e se ne andrà....

  ha agito così con me, ed io voglio sperare che non la tratterà meno
  bene di me.

  saluti tanto la mia vedova, e mi creda niente affatto suo
  devotissimo

                                                     paolo minelli.

                                 * * *

                    _lettera di oreste a maddalena._

      maddalena,

  il nostro amore riceve un colpo mortale!

  _egli_ si è ucciso!

  senza saperlo, ha scelto la più tremenda delle vendette.

  egli vivo, ci univa — morto in tal modo, ci disunisce per sempre!

  qual vita, infatti, sarebbe la nostra, se ci ostinassimo a
  volere una felicità impossibile? — il suo fantasma sarebbe
  sempre con noi.... le nostre famiglie ci respingerebbero, tutti
  ci segnerebbero a dito, dicendo: — ecco coloro che hanno ucciso
  quell’infelice.... vedete gli sposi assassini! — e noi stessi
  potremmo sopportare la vista di noi?

  che abbiamo mai fatto!

  ora, non ci resta che piangere, tornare nel seno delle nostre
  famiglie, espiare con una vita onesta un errore giovanile — e non
  vederci mai più.

  a te, maddalena, più avventurata di me, perdendo le gioje
  dell’amore, rimangono ancora le gioje sublimi della madre.

  la tua bambina sarà la tua delizia e il tuo conforto.

  rinunciando ad amarci e a vederci, noi non potremo certo obliare i
  sogni passati.... la memoria di questo amore sarà una religione!

      addio. addio!

                                                            oreste.

  _ps._ le vicende della vita sono varie.... se mai ti tornassero
  avverse.... ricordati di me. ho voluto, dovuto dirti questo per
  togliermi dall’animo un peso opprimente.

  parto senza vederti.... il perchè lo comprendi.

                                 * * *

                        _risposta di maddalena._

      oreste,

  hai ragione. — addio per sempre. — grazie. — non ho, nè avrò mai
  bisogno di nulla.... saprò lavorare.

  sei un gentiluomo — dunque, tutto è sepolto, _tutto_!

                                                         maddalena.

                                 * * *

quella sera, il padre e la madre di oreste stavano seduti sur un
divano, nella sala da pranzo, silenziosi e mesti. vedevano che la mensa
era servita, ma non potevano muoversi.

a un tratto si scossero.... — era una scampanellata....

pochi secondi dopo, l’uscio si aperse e comparve oreste, fermandosi
sulla soglia, umile, abbattuto, esitante....

— ah! è lui — gridò la madre giubilante, correndo ad abbracciarlo.

il cieco padre ebbe un tremito, ma non fe’ motto.

— sei solo?.... — mormorò la madre all’orecchio del figlio.

— solo.

— è finita?

— finita.

— vieni!.... — eugenio — fece verso il marito, conducendo a lui oreste
per mano — consola questo povero ragazzo.... che ha mancato.... ma che
è pentito.... e soffre. —

il cieco porse una mano, che fu presa e coperta di baci — quindi
respirando largamente e alzandosi, disse:

— e ora che siamo ancora in tre.... pranziamo.... oreste, adesso se
potessi vederci.... non sarebbe proprio male! —

                             . . . . . . .

in casa soranzi non si parlò più di maddalena, come se neanche
esistesse.

un anno circa dopo la catastrofe, oreste era avvocato e sposava la
figlia di un alto magistrato, buona, timida, graziosa creatura, sulla
quale la madre di oreste aveva da un pezzo posto gli occhi, e di cui
diceva: — per quella, garantisco. —

oreste fu conquistato dalla soavità della giovinetta — e quando la
madre gliela propose, non seppe dir di no.




quando maddalena lesse il biglietto di soranzi, per quanto fosse
corazzata e tutt’altro che tenera del marito, non potè a meno di
fremere. una morte naturale.... pazienza! era una disgrazia, e
oltrechè inevitabile, preveduta vicinissima, e al punto a cui eran
giunte le cose.... non avrebbe messo nessuno alla disperazione — ma
quell’uccidersi!....

tal senso di terrore tuttavia fu breve e lieve — seguirono intensi
e lunghi invece il dispetto della perduta fortuna e le ansiose
apprensioni per l’avvenire.... che sarebbe di lei?....

più ci pensava e più le pareva che la delicatezza di sentire di oreste
fosse esagerata.

che relazione aveva l’avvenire col passato? l’ombra.... un’ombra!....
del defunto colle gioje reali dei vivi?.... perchè temere l’opinione
pubblica.... la quale si sa che cos’è e della quale si fa tutto quel
che si vuole? — fisime, ubbíe! — ci fu un momento in cui balzò in piedi
per corrergli dietro, afferrarlo per un braccio e dirgli: — fermati,
fanciullo.... e lascia fare a me! — ma siedè tosto.

raggiungerlo.... in casa, forse? — affrontare.... chi sa.... fosse un
oltraggio? — scrivergli, supplicarlo, minacciarlo di darsi morte?

non essendovi amore, l’orgoglio ne la dissuadeva.

d’altronde, a che poteva servire un espediente.... per quanto
drammatico, con un figlio che sapeva tanto subordinato ai parenti?

si trovava nelle di lei braccia.... ed era fuggito!....

dunque che sperare mai ora? ah! non bisognava pensarvi più.

bisognava pensare piuttosto a provvedere altrimenti per l’avvenire.

dopo un’ora di meditazione, il suo programma era fissato.

prima di tutto era necessario ripresentarsi in società colla ragione
da parte sua. ella era la vittima! chi osava sostenere che ella era il
carnefice?

e poteva provar tutto in propria difesa, mentre nessuno poteva provar
nulla contro di lei.

cominciò dal partire per recarsi, la furba, in altro luogo, donde potè
scrivere:

      cari genitori,

  sono presso mia figlia.

  ho saputo della triste fine di quel povero uomo.... io lo
  compiango.

  se la gelosia non lo avesse accecato, non avrebbe, senza alcuna
  cagione, dato corpo a delle ombre — io non mi sarei spaventata....
  e la mia assoluta innocenza sarebbe stata luminosamente provata....
  me ne appello al signor ragioniere! — così invece.... basta,
  non ci pensiamo, perchè non v’è più rimedio. sono immersa in una
  profonda tristezza. mamma, vieni a trovarmi. io non ritornerò che
  fra qualche mese in casa vostra, se mi vorrete. s’intende che a
  pasqua lasceremo casa soranzi, perchè non voglio abitare vicino a
  quell’altra casa, che mi ricorderebbe tante sventure.

  non so che cosa dica la gente. dite pure al signor ragioniere che
  faccio assegnamento sulla sua prudenza e sul suo buon cuore, onde
  dichiari null’altro che la pura verità, senza entrare in alcun
  particolare ozioso, che potrebbe far torto alla memoria di mio
  marito.

  la gente deve sapere solo che in séguito ad un diverbio fra me e
  il povero paolo, per ragioni d’interessi, io, d’accordo con voi,
  sono venuta a passare qualche giorno presso mia figlia, per lasciar
  campo al sereno di tornare.... e ch’egli, uomo debole, senza fibra,
  ormai vedendosi dissestato, si è ucciso, mentre si poteva ancora,
  col tempo, lavorando, rimediare a tutto.

  non so se mio marito abbia lasciato delle disposizioni.... ad ogni
  modo, dite al signor ragioniere che io non voglio nulla per me.
  tutto per mia figlia.... per la mia silvia, che è tanto bella....
  oh! se è bella!

  mamma, vieni subito, e fa di condur con te anche il signor
  ragioniere.... al quale devo fare mille scuse, e col quale voglio
  intendermi per molte e molte cose.

                                   _vostra affezionatissima figlia_
                                                         maddalena.

  _ps_. vi prego di deporre una corona sulla tomba del mio povero
  paolo.

                                 * * *

i papetti, ricevendo questa lettera, cominciarono a respirar meglio.
quell’altra di minelli li aveva costernati, avviliti al punto che
non osavan più uscir di casa.... tanto loro pareva che tutta la
gente avesse a segnarli a dito e chieder loro conto del sangue d’un
innocente.

figurarsi che balsamo lo scritto della figlia! tutta la verità era
ora chiara, lampante — ed era proprio quella verità che si voleva.
maddalena, pura come un angelo — minelli, un uomo disperato e ubbriaco.

già l’avevano sempre detto che beveva troppo, che doveva finir male!

la madre raggiunse la figlia conducendo con sè il degno ragioniere,
il quale non aveva, per caso, ancor da rimproverarsi alcun torto verso
maddalena.

uomo prudente e di cuore infatti.

non appena letto il testamento di minelli, egli l’aveva abbruciato
— perchè dubitando da lungo tempo del cervello del suicida, e non
trovando provata l’infrazione del regolamento conjugale, o, per lo
meno, provata la gravità — non si era creduto in diritto e, tanto meno,
in dovere di assumersi alcuna responsabilità, nè in faccia agli uomini,
nè in faccia alla sua coscienza.

aveva dunque detto: — il tribunale provveda. —

quando poi ebbe parlato con maddalena, si felicitò con sè stesso della
sua prudenza. la bella donna ebbe per lui tante gentilezze, tante
graziose parole, seppe tanto bene dargli ad intendere tutto quello che
volle, che egli tornò in città disposto a dichiarare che la signora
minelli era una santa.

il padre soranzi aveva scritto che maddalena era l’oggetto della
esecrazione generale, — ma l’esecrazione generale non v’era che nella
sua coscienza rivoltata. innanzi tutto, mancavano assolutamente gli
elementi per poter esecrare. quel giornale aveva detto di non voler
parlare, ma.... non sapeva niente. il ragioniere, soranzi e papetti non
avevan fiatato, ciascuno per le sue buone ragioni — per cui la città,
che usciva tutta arrembata, intorpidita, sonnacchiosa, infreddata,
aveva ben altro a fare che interessarsi per due iniziali trovate morte
in un giornale — senz’alcun particolare.

si, i conoscenti fantasticarono.... ma le dichiarazioni del ragioniere
e dei papetti non lasciarono neppur subodorare la verità vera. il
dissesto finanziario era proprio l’unica causa impellente al suicidio.

il giorno di pasqua, al corso, la gente ammirava una signora di
maravigliosa bellezza, alla quale un _lutto intiero_ del miglior
gusto dava un risalto e un carattere fantastico — che sola, severa,
imponente, marciava, senza vedere alcuno.

— guarda la bella minelli! — dicevano i conoscenti, e trovavano che
anche la vedovanza a lei faceva bene.

che floridezza di carnagione!

                                 * * *

il ragioniere era stato, come si poteva prevedere, nominato tutore
della figlia di minelli.

la liquidazione della sostanza produsse in cifra tondo l. 40,000, che
furono investite in rendita intestata a _silvia maria caterina minelli
del fu paolo, minorenne_.

s’intende che l’assegno accordato alla vedova pel suo mantenimento —
finchè ella non passasse ad altre nozze — doveva venir prelevato dai
frutti del suddetto capitale. maddalena trovò che non v’era da star
allegri. quella era la miseria.... per lei.

_nulla per me, tutto per mia figlia_, aveva ella scritto — ma quando
si è maddalena, sono cose che si scrivono, per un secondo fine. nella
sua ignoranza assoluta in materia di affari e di codice, ella sperava
ben altro. la circostanza di tale trattamento omeopatico, la forzò a
modificare sensibilmente il suo programma....

bisognava rinunciare alla caccia d’un marito ricco, perchè
probabilmente lunga, faticosa, dispendiosa — oltrechè d’incertissimo
successo — fare invece la caccia alla borsa.... il trovare una
_posizione_, essendo molto più agevole e breve — il che urgeva.

ma perciò, occorrendo una perfetta libertà di movimenti, uscì di casa
e andò a far la signora sola, sul corso più frequentato dal denaro e
dalla lussuria, in un bell’appartamentino ammobiliato negli ammezzati,
pel riflesso che il vivere.... quasi in istrada, le permetteva di
offrirsi continuamente in tutti gli abbigliamenti più originali ed
eleganti e in tutte le pose più seducenti.

annodò l’amicizia colle donnine più.... coraggiose, che aveva
conosciute negli ultimi mesi e che tenevano corte galante — e cominciò
a _ricevere_.

erano geniali ritrovi, in cui si faceva della musica e del tè, per aver
una ragione di far della diplomazia amorosa.

si poteva dire tutto quello che occorreva per, poscia, poter fare.

le dichiarazioni e le proposte non mancarono a maddalena, ma ella
— senza disgustare alcuno, ben inteso; non si sa mai! — rispondeva
sempre che non le era permesso di prenderle nella considerazione che
meritavano — a motivo del lutto.

realmente le pareva di meritar meglio. tutti i giorni ne entra _uno_,
dicono, in città.... poteva arrivare anche quello che ci voleva per
lei.

arrivò....

maddalena credette aver fatto un gran colpo.... e invece non fu che un
colpo di gran cassa.... vuota.

era un agente di cambio esotico, che pareva il re di denari, ma che, i
denari, li faceva scappare. non aveva la fortuna propizia.... ossia,
qualche volta essa gli sorrideva, ma egli, allora, si mostrava tanto
indiscreto, che era costretta a fargli subito il broncio. egli aveva
visitate le primarie borse, e, partendo, le aveva lasciate tutte molto
afflitte, perchè molto piagate. cosa straordinaria, la cagione della
piaga era sempre un _cerotto_.

quando conobbe maddalena, era in un momento di vena; — in una sola
liquidazione aveva guadagnato cinquantamila lire. per due mesi,
maddalena menò l’esistenza più fastosa — era la donna più invidiata....
anche da qualche donna onesta — ma una sera, in cui egli lasciandola in
teatro con un’amica, la salutò dicendole: — vado un momento al _club_,
poi ci rivedremo; — ella, tornata a casa, — come minelli buon’anima! —
non trovò più le sue gioje e trovò un biglietto che diceva:

      mia cara,

  «ho perduto e devo andarmene. — perdona se riprendo qualcuno
  de’ miei doni. tu mi ami troppo per non voler permettermi di
  partire.... ed io ti giuro imperitura riconoscenza.»

maddalena urlò, cacciò la cameriera, ruppe uno specchio, due bottiglie,
non potè mangiare per tre giorni.... e poi, ebbe pietà di sè stessa e
di un nuovo aspirante.... un nuovo molto vecchio, venerabile però....
per ricchezza, il quale aveva due soli culti, quello della lunga ed
argentea sua barba, e...., l’altro non occor dirlo.

per rispetto alla sua età, tuttavia, egli si accontentava delle cure
filiali.

quelle di maddalena riempirono nuovamente lo scrignetto, ed ella
potè sognare di trovare un giorno un codicillo a di lei favore sul
testamento del vegliardo, che le giurava eterna fede.... forse perchè
aveva già un piede nell’eternità.

ma un giorno le vennero a dire che il veglio era morto sotto un colpo
apopletico, e che il testamento non aveva il codicillo.

due anni di tenerezze filiali proprio sciupati!

allora.... allora cominciò per lei un’esistenza d’un certo genere,
in cui noi non possiamo seguirla. sarebbe anche nojoso. le posizioni
furono molte e varie.... e ricorderemo a tal proposito certi versi,
che un insolente ex-cuoco arricchito le dedicò, senza arrossire
dell’irriverenza che commetteva contro il poeta:

    . . . . . . . . . . .
    le procellose e trepide
    gioje di gran disegni,
    l’ansie d’un cor che docile
    fervente è pei sostegni
    e i giunge e tien quel premio
    che diè follia a sperar.
      (_s’intende la follia degli sciocchi_)
    tutto provò: la gloria
    di far sentir gli artigli...
    le fughe.... la baldoria....
    la reggia.... no! — ma figli (_di famiglia_)
    molti sì, che in polvere
    per lei i padri mandar....

continua, ma basta.... non è vero?

chi conobbe maddalena nel fortunoso periodo che corre fra i ventidue
e i trent’anni, dice che a poco a poco, della donna, perdette sin
la vernice, e finì ad essere la più spudorata e la più cinica delle
creature.

noi supponiamo che, in uno di quegli anni, debba essere stata scritta
quella tal lettera, la quale conteneva tante buone informazioni
di maddalena — e probabilmente da qualcuno che — chi sa come fu
spennacchiato, deriso, mistificato! — non potendo più salvare sè
stesso, voleva salvare qualche amico.

era diventata uno di quei cavallacci del piacere che si trovano in
tutti i festini, in tutti i bagordi, e che la gioventù corre sempre a
cercare, perchè hanno il diavolo nel sangue, perchè saltano, urlano,
strillano, trangugiano, tracannano per notti intiere alla fila....
dicendo e facendo.... quello che l’indomani, gli stessi ubbriachi
commilitoni della notte, svegliandosi, non vogliono nemmen ricordarsi.

i genitori, sulle prime, scandalizzati, avevano protestato —
inutilmente — poi si erano rassegnati, dietro il riflesso che in fin
dei conti ella era libera.... finirono quindi ad accettare i di lei
inviti a pranzo, anche quando v’erano i suoi protettori, e può essere
che l’indigestione non sia stata estranea alla loro morte.... caterina
però finì come aveva sempre vissuto, da buona cristiana, con tutti i
conforti della religione.

per dare un’idea..... debole, già! di ciò che era diventata maddalena,
citeremo alcune delle frasi che di lei ci furono riferite.... e che non
sentono l’ubbriachezza. sentono certo un bel disprezzo per gli altri e
anche per sè.... ma vi si trova qua e là in mezzo alle facezie, quello
che noi cerchiamo avidamente da per tutto: _la verità_....

si dirà: euh! la verità che viene da una simile bocca....!

maledite pur la bocca — ma benedite la verità, e benedite anche il
vino, se esso l’ha fatta sgorgare.

ma leggete e accettate.... quel che vi conviene:

— la paura è la virtù di molte donne. col pensiero, chi sa quanti
desiderj, colla bocca, chi sa quanti sospiri che volano chi sa per
dove, chi sa quanti abbracci legali che illudono, per un istante, una
mente già _occupata_.

le giovinette, che scrivono lettere amorose, hanno sempre la frase
sacramentale: «ti giuro che ti sarò fedele fino all’ara.» esse giurano
il vero: _fino_. — siamo belle noi altre donne! _prima_ ci diciamo
offese, se non ci rispettano; _dopo_, è il rispettarci che diventa non
solo offesa, delitto.

un uomo che non può più correre, non deve permettersi nuovi amori....;
se ne stia ai vecchi — gli verrà tenuto conto, se non altro, dei
servigi prestati. — una moglie che vede suo marito ubbriaco, ne ha
tanta nausea che comincia subito ad amar un altro, anche quando non sa
chi possa essere.... se poi lo sa!.... — di riscontro essa fa bere il
suo amante, e se lo vede ebbro.... ride.... — una moglie che tollera un
marito che beve.... o beve anch’essa.... o ha bisogno ch’egli beva....
— una donna onesta può essere indifferente a che non le si faccia
attenzione, perchè si sa che è inaccessibile, ma può anche soffrire. se
soffre, è certo che accetterà una medicina. — se una donna è giovane,
abbracciatela solo quando, cogli occhi, ve ne dà il permesso. se ha
passati i quaranta, se è dopo pranzo e se nessuno vede, abbracciatela
senz’altro.

nulla di più vero che: _errando s’impara_. — s’impara a errare sempre
meglio.

un discorso che le mogli infedeli amano — ahi! troppo! — fare ai loro
amanti, è quello dei rimorsi da cui sono amareggiate. v’è un altro
discorso, ed è quello delle qualità, delle virtù dei loro mariti.

se una moglie ama davvero il suo amante, ciò che è abbastanza raro,
è già disposta ad uccidere il marito. — gli uomini hanno il torto
di voler spiegare troppo e troppe cose alle donne, come se esse non
capissero niente.... ed esse sanno già tutto. — noi donne capiamo,
forse non molto, di tutto quello che interessa gli uomini, ma per noi
ci vuol così poco.... _ossia_....

un marito non deve mai parlare dei suoi diritti.... corre gran rischio
di subire dei rovesci. — una donna è sempre onesta, dove arriva per la
prima volta.

riabilitare.... se vuol dire rendere abile di nuovo.... è l’illusione
degli imbecilli. quando si danno dei casi che farebbero credere alla
riabilitazione.... state pur certi che quella donna era molto stanca.
del resto, una donna si può riabilitare molte volte.

essendo donna, non credo a quello che mi dicono le donne, neanche
quando mi parlano male di sè stesse. — i mariti che dicono: «a noi non
ce la fanno....» fanno ridere.... ma se è già fatto!

noi donne non ci divertiamo mai tanto quanto allora che dobbiamo punire
un uomo della sua presunzione o delle sue villanie. è vero che non
abbiamo a nostra disposizione che un mezzo unico di vendetta.... ma ce
ne accontentiamo.

un uomo ricco può essere un asino, ma è un asino ricco. d’altronde
è un asino a cui tutti accordano dell’ingegno. e se prendete un uomo
d’ingegno, ma povero, non è forse tenuto per più asino dell’altro?

e poi, un asino è ciò che conviene meglio ad una donna, perchè si può
farne quello che si vuole....; quando ha la sua biada, non cerca altro.
— l’uomo molto barbuto è il più docile colla donna. e quando vorrebbe
mostrarsi un po’ restío, la donna non ha che accarezzargli la barba....
ed egli va.

l’amore è una bellissima cosa in un bell’appartamento, ben serviti e
ben nutriti.

a stomaco vuoto, non v’è amore possibile — e due amanti, che sarebbero
pronti a morir l’uno per l’altro, se fossero affamati e trovassero un
tozzo di pane.... se lo contenderebbero a pugni. — una scena del teatro
è che una moglie, la quale pericola, si salvi al comparire della sua
bambina — una scena della vita è che essa mandi la bambina a dormire o
a spasso colla fantesca.... quando non l’abbia già fatto.

se invece d’una sola bambina, gli autori si servissero.... di dodici
figli, per esempio.... qual scena commovente!.... ella griderebbe
allora: — venite.... correte.... tutti sul mio cuore, o miei dodici
figli, e salvatemi! — si potrebbe chiamare la _scena delle canne
dell’organo_. è vero che con dodici figli non si dovrebbero correre più
perigli.... a meno che non fossero sei coppie di gemelli di produzione
annuale.

una donna dice a _lui_ piangendo: — ma perchè mai volete perdermi? — ma
no.... cara.... anzi, io voglio trovarvi. —

                                 * * *

v’è della gente che m’ha rimproverata perchè io, dopo aver lasciato per
tre anni la mia silvia presso i miei parenti, quando essi morirono, la
misi in collegio, invece di prenderla con me.... cosa volete che faccia
con me.... o, cosa volete che io me ne faccia, colla vita che conduco?
— vi sono delle madri che, per economia, tengono le loro figlie con
sè.... ma questo non vuol sempre dire che diano loro buon esempio....
e quanti siete qui, ne sapete qualche cosa.... e poi, già, io non
sono nata _madre_.... quindi non è colpa mia se io non sento niente di
quello che le altre dicono di sentire, o sentono anche realmente, pei
loro figli. io ragiono forse troppo.... ma si divien madre tanto per
un.... nonnulla!.... e quando meno vi si pensa o lo si desidera. chi
non è madre, materialmente.... cominciando da qualunque bestia?

quanto all’esserlo moralmente.... con tutto quello che ci vorrebbe....
mi pare un po’ difficile.

è una cosa curiosa e divertente il ragionare su tutto quello che si
dice e si scrive sulla maternità e sulla paternità, sui padri e sulle
madri. a sentirli, si direbbe che, perchè si è guadagnato.... per
il proprio piacere, il nome di padre e di madre, si sia diventati
qualche cosa di sacro e di santo.... si direbbe che vi sia alcun che
di generalmente sentito e scrupolosamente praticato, giusta tutte le
esigenze di un sentimento reale e della virtù. ora, si può dire che,
preso il complesso delle famiglie, v’è un po’ pochino di buono, e
mi si può credere, tanto più che io non ho a lodarmi nè di casa mia,
nè del mio matrimonio, nè del mio me.... oh! io sono sincera più che
obbligante, anche con me stessa.

dunque, vedete che c’è di serio nella parola _paternità_!

gli uomini, fino al giorno in cui prendono moglie — e quanti non la
prendono mai! — seminano tanta paternità, da coprir di bipedi il globo
in ben pochi anni — eppure non si danno alcun pensiero delle loro....
inutili _azioni_. non si danno pensiero nemmeno delle azioni utili,
perchè, ciò che riesce a incarnarsi, i loro figli effettivi, vivono
sotto altri nomi e sotto altri tetti, compreso quello dell’ospedale. —
oh! un bel giorno prendono moglie e, allora, cominciano tutte le smanie
paterne.... quando cominciano. per molti non cominciano mai, per molti
durano poco.... il tempo in cui i bambini sono un balocco! e quindi si
mutano in indifferenza, in noja, e anche in odio. e lo stesso avviene
nelle donne....

ma anche quando v’è la famiglia, la maternità e la paternità sono forse
prese sul serio? vi sono dei matrimonj che vogliono aspettare qualche
anno ad aver figli, per poter godere un po’ la gioventù....; dopo
poi si vedrà. ve ne sono altri in cui si vuol avere un figlio.... o
due.... o tre.... o quattro.... a scadenza fissa di due, tre anni....
secondo! e poi basterà. basterà, a meno che il dio bacco non disponga
altrimenti.... quanta gente non deve la vita.... a un bicchiere di vino
di più. vi sono invece moltissime unioni, in cui la natura non vien
mai delusa.... e allora, nasce una nidiata di figli, pei quali non v’è
nè un cencio, nè un tozzo di pane sicuro. bell’amor paterno e materno
davvero! — si parla di maternità e di paternità, e vi sono matrimonj
di etici, di storpj, di nani, di gobbi, di gozzuti, di scrofolosi! —
paternità e maternità.... e la maggior parte dei padri e delle madri
non hanno alcuna idea di alcuno dei loro doveri.... non hanno nemmeno
un’idea di ciò che è igiene. quanti matrimonj, i quali non sono che
fabbriche di miasmi!

gli uomini prendono moglie dicendo fra sè: — ai bambini che verranno,
penserà la loro mamma.... — le fanciulle hanno smesso la bambola per
imparare.... a ballare, a farsi più belle o meno brutte, e a cogliere
un marito — talvolta smettono la bambola la vigilia quasi del loro
matrimonio.

oh! ne sapranno tanto, quando avranno dei figli! — non hanno ancor
imparato a capire tutto quello che c’è di falso nella educazione che
hanno ricevuta.... e dovranno accingersi ad educare i loro bambini!
è vero che si fa presto a dir quattro orazioni, a andare a messa e
a confessarsi — ecco anzi mezza educazione — quanto al resto, per
una metà, se ne incarica la fantesca, e per l’altra il maestro o la
maestra....

madri, padri, non hanno un’idea di medicina, e se i loro bambini cadono
malati, è quasi sempre seriamente, perchè nessuno ha saputo capire
i primi sintomi del male. se muojono poi, sono strida e maledizioni
contro il medico e contro la cosidetta provvidenza! — che studio
infinito sarebbe quello delle varietà delle madri? guardate, soltanto
nella casa in cui io abito, vi sarà una ventina di madri. quanta
differenza fra l’una e l’altra, siano buone, siano cattive!

innanzi tutto, cosa strana, la madre migliore è una matrigna, ma quella
è nata per amare tutto il genere umano, i cani, i gatti, le galline,
le tortore, i fiori.... tutto l’universo. — v’è una madre che si fa
dar del _lei_ dai figli, e li tiene in un’estrema soggezione. ha due
ragazze, già grandi.... ebbene, quando va a passeggio se le manda
davanti.... ma non unite, no, bensì l’una dopo l’altra....; pare un
tiro a due.... tirolese.... che so io! — quando v’è la mamma in quella
casa, guaj a chi parla, guaj al figlio che ha un’opinione! è una madre?
— ve n’è un’altra che non può veder le figlie, perchè diventano grandi,
più belle di lei, e le impediscono di.... _brillare_, come pel passato.
— una terza ha rubato l’amante ad una figlia, che n’è morta — avrebbe
fatto altrettanto con una seconda figlia, se quella non fosse fuggita
coll’amante, per finire poi.... come finì. — ve n’è una quarta che non
può star in casa sua un momento.... tutto il santo giorno è di qua o
di là da un vicino o dall’altro, colla cigaretta in bocca — in casa,
intanto, tutto va come dio vuole. — in un’altra casa, invece, la mamma
dice sempre ai figli: — andate, andate dove volete, ma lasciatemi in
pace, qui mi seccate! — v’è la madre del terrore.... i suoi figli sono
tanti cenci lavati, non possono nè mangiare nè svilupparsi, tale è lo
spavento che essa incute loro. non apre bocca che per bestemmiare e
minacciare, non muove mano che per percuotere. — a uscio a uscio con
me, abita una donna, che è veramente incomprensibile.... un fenomeno.
era la maggiore di otto fratelli e sorelle. restati orfani, ella,
a quindici anni, prese la direzione della casa, allevò, educò — e
benissimo — quei sette fanciulli, con un amore, con un’abnegazione
proprio commoventi.... a venti anni non aveva ancor veduto un teatro.
un signore, a tale miracolo di fanciulla, se ne innamora e la sposa....
bene! lo credereste? la più amorosa delle sorelle è una cattiva
madre.... odia i suoi figli — ne ha otto — ed è diventata stolta al
punto da pretendere che, bambini come sono, non abbiano a bere più
di tre volte al giorno. questo vi dà un’idea del resto. — oh! sì....
v’è la madre buona, premurosa, dolce.... ma è tanto stucchevole,
col suo cinguettamento eterno, coi suoi pettegolezzi, che non si può
tollerarla.... e con lei i figli maschi e femmine, degni allievi di
tanta maestra.

questa ama i figli belli ed odia quei brutti.... e son tutti suoi!
— quella idolatra i suoi figli, darebbe il sangue per loro, ma è la
loro schiava, e quindi, siccome i fanciulli non hanno senso comune,
imaginate che cosa potranno diventare! — un’altra ama i figli, sì....
ma insegna loro a sprezzare e a deridere il padre. — un bel genere è
un certo donnone che abita all’ultimo piano. è vedova ed ha quattro
figlie, la minore di dodici, la maggiore di vent’anni. in quella
casa, pur che si porti da mangiare e da bere, non si bada tanto pel
sottile.... venga chi vuole.... basta che sia gente allegra e generosa.
— anche il cappellajo e la cappellaja, per godersela, non ischerzano!
di carnevale, hanno il coraggio di andare ai veglioni dei peggiori
teatri, con tutta la brigata.... dieci figli! là si fanno dare un
palchetto con camerino in terza o quarta fila, e _allons!_ si mangia
e si beve fino alla mattina. fra i figli, vi sono due ragazze....
belline anche, l’una di tredici, l’altra di quattordici.... ebbene, le
trovate vaganti, sole pei corritoj, a udire, a vedere tutto quello che
si può udire e vedere, specialmente dopo una cena, in simili luoghi
— e chiunque vuole, fosse anche ubbriaco, le bacia, le accarezza,
le trascina, le fa ballare. non avranno ancor perduto niente, non
so.... ma davvero che se fossi un uomo, non mi desterebbero più alcun
desiderio. — vedete quante donne che si chiamano madri!? — ed io, per
non essere migliore delle altre.... amo mia figlia, perchè è tanto
bella che non posso non amarla.... e nello stesso tempo la odio....
perchè dico: — va là che un giorno sarai anche tu come noi altre!.... —
e ciò vuol dire che siamo tutti tanti bei matti.... perchè vogliamo il
bene.... e non sappiamo fare che il male.... cioè.... sì, insomma, non
siamo angeli già!.... —

                             . . . . . . .

maddalena che faceva della morale!!!

e quanti ce ne sono che ne fanno.... e non valgono meglio di lei.




il dire che la vita del piacere avvizzisce il cuore e ci rende più
egoisti di quel che siamo, è dire una verità nojosa — il dire che il
piacere porta di frequente con sè tremende punizioni delle gioje che ci
procura, come se tali gioje fossero delitti, è dire una verità nojosa e
odiosa, perchè non bisogna mai disturbare la gente che si diverte.

verso i trent’anni, maddalena fu colta da malore così fiero e
così lungo, da far temere non fosse indomabile. tuttavia, guarì —
relativamente, s’intende — perchè quando il sangue è guasto da certi
principj malefici, vera vita non si può più godere.

ma, pazienza ancora, il guarire relativamente! v’era un guajo ben
più grave per lei.... la sua bellezza era sparita, non solo, ma anche
la sua carnagione, l’occhio.... tutto in lei s’era tanto alterato da
ispirare paragoni poco poetici.

nè basta. la sua pinguedine, in dieci anni, era cresciuta
sproporzionatamente — nondimeno la sapiente scelta delle stoffe e
dei colori, l’abilissimo taglio delle vesti, la pressione spietata
del busto lasciavano ancor supporre la statua.... statua fatta
senza risparmio, ma marmo, con linee non inartistiche. e poi, c’era
quel volto così pieno di vita e quegli occhi così rifulgenti che
passava anche ciò che non poteva passare. ma quando il suo sangue fu
avvelenato, tutto diventò così floscio e cascante da potersi chiamare
una donna.... spostata e squilibrata — il che, unito all’avvilimento da
cui fu compresa a tanta degradazione fisica, tolse anche al suo incesso
quella maestà che prima, come sappiamo, imponeva.

allora, di adoratori.... non se ne vide più uno — le amiche giovani e
belle la sfuggirono — ed ella restò sola.... ossia colla società di
qualche veterana della stessa milizia, a cui unico conforto era il
ricordare le fatte campagne.

sulle prime maddalena non si diede per vinta.... e mise in opera tutti
i secreti miracolosi che l’arte e la ciarlataneria le offrivano, per
ricuperare la primiera freschezza e vigorìa — ma ahimè! se volle parere
ancor qualche cosa.... da lontano, dovette ricorrere ad empiastri e
vernici d’ogni genere.... che non fecero tornare gli adoratori.

allora, siccome la volpe era troppo vecchia e troppo bisognosa, per
perdere le sue abitudini.... così, volendo continuare a tender reti
agli imbecilli, dovette prendere delle precauzioni, per non spaventare
nessuno, e accontentarsi della parte d’_avventura di carnevale_ per
i provinciali e per i gaglioffi, che chiamano avventura — in luogo di
sventura! — un dominó il quale vi mangia una cena e può rubarvi borsa e
orologio, oltre il lasciarvi qualche _souvenir_.

ma, quel primo carnevale avendo reso poco, ella si trovò davanti la
terribile prospettiva di una fila di anni più magri della più magra
quaresima.

il suo regno era finito!

e, quel che era desolante, mentre i re e le regine spodestate non
patiscono l’asciutto, perchè, da brave formiche, anzi formiconi,
nell’estate del potere, hanno messo in serbo abbondanti provvisioni per
l’inverno dell’impotenza, maddalena si trovava pressochè miserabile.

spensierata, ella aveva sempre creduto ad un’estate eterna, e aveva
sempre pazzamente gettato a due mani ciò che riceveva con una sola.
ora, dopo più d’un anno di malattia e d’abbandono, non le restava
che qualche mlgliajo di lire, avanzo dell’eredità paterna, e il lusso
ammassato in dieci anni.... il che, trattandosi di dover vendere, era
proprio poco, ed entro alcuni anni, anche facendo economia — cosa molto
dolorosa! — sarebbe tutto sfumato.

allora.... allora le venne in mente sua figlia, che aveva, per
tanto tempo, trascurata, e trovò che conveniva prenderla con sè e
affezionarsela, perchè così, la figlia non avrebbe mai abbandonato sua
madre.

silvia, benchè, per varj anni — dopo la morte del nonno e della nonna
— avesse veduto ben di rado sua madre, pure l’amava molto — era così
bella la mamma! — quei pochi nonnulla e confetti che ne riceveva, di
tanto in tanto, le parevano il _non plus ultra_ dell’affezione materna,
anche perchè, il ragioniere e le maestre, presi da pietà per la
quasi derelitta fanciulla, non volendo farla nè infelice, nè cattiva,
fomentavano in lei la tenerezza filiale e le magnificavano la bontà e
l’amore della madre. così la ragazza, amando, cresceva felice e buona.

imaginarsi la gioja di silvia quando maddalena la levò dal collegio, e
come corrispose espansiva, ingenua, alle di lei interessate premure!
si sarebbe detto, tanta era la sua affettuosità, che ella sentisse
essere quello l’unico modo di compensarla della bellezza perduta —
e forse era così. — poche madri potevano vantarsi d’aver una figlia
tanto cara, e maddalena per qualche anno visse tranquilla, senza
preoccupazioni per l’avvenire, ma quando silvia fu giunta ai quindici
anni e, già vistosetta, cominciarono i complimenti, le occhiate, gli
augurj, le apprensioni di maddalena si ridestarono più vive che mai....
se sua figlia si maritasse, che sarebbe di lei?.... supposto anche che,
per bontà, volesse continuare a pagare un certo assegno a sua madre,
sarebbe pur sempre una meschinità.

e le condizioni economiche di tal matrimonio, ora d’importanza
imprevedibile, lo permetterebbero poi? — il marito non si
opporrebbe?... insomma, tutte le paure anche irragionevoli,
ingiustificabili.... appunto perchè paure.

ah! bisognava a qualunque costo far in modo che sua figlia non avesse
mai a separarsi da lei.... o, per lo meno, che non avesse a separarsi
senza che, prima, a lei maddalena, fosse già assicurato un congruo
trattamento per tutta la vita, e senza lesinerie, perchè ella era
abituata bene, e non poteva assolutamente cominciare adesso a vivere
come una pitocca....

ed esaminando attentamente, come farebbe un perito, quasi a valutarle,
tutte le varie perfezioni di quel vaghissimo fiore, ella diceva fra sè:

— ma può un uomo negare qualche cosa alla madre di tanta figlia? —

allora cominciò l’educazione, la vera educazione di silvia, e la
materia del primo corso fu, nell’intenzione di maddalena, lo studio del
modo di premunirsi contro l’amore.

mise in avvertenza la figlia contro quegli insulsi complimenti ed
augurj, parole d’uso, spiccioli convenzionali della conversazione, che
si fanno a tutte e che, a spremerli, non c’è una stilla di sugo. — le
disse che il matrimonio era forse un male necessario o presto o tardi,
ma sempre un male, e che quindi era bene non pensarci. — lasciasse
fare a lei, che era sua madre, la quale saprebbe guidarla sempre bene
onde non avesse mai a trovarsi infelice. — coperse di ridicolo tutti
gli uomini in genere — e figurarsi se quella lingua non vi riuscì a
meraviglia! — glieli dipinse tutti come ipocriti, sciocchi, venali....
povera silvia, se mai le avvenisse di credere a qualcuno.... povera
dote! — e batteva su quella dote, unico scopo di tanti tristi. — ah! se
si presentasse quel tale che _andasse bene_.... sarebbe ella la prima a
raccomandarglielo.... ma dopo un lungo studio, dopo.... dopo.... e dopo
tante precauzioni che non finivano più.

pochi mesi di tal scuola premunirono silvia contro tutte le seduzioni
della giovinezza.

era la più indifferente ragazza di questo mondo per quanto,
d’ordinario, occupa la fantasia delle ragazze — e poco le mancava a
compiere i bellissimi sedici anni.... quando, un incidente qualunque
venne a dar principio ad avvenimenti molto deplorevoli, in cui la
fanciulla fu travolta, e rappresentò una parte.... che sarà giudicata,
che fu anche odiosa.... ma che alla gente fornita di ragione,
spassionata, farà dire: — non poteva essere altrimenti. —




quando maddalena aveva pensato a levare silvia dal collegio, aveva
veduto la necessità di cambiar, prima, d’abitazione. in quella in cui
si trovava, da quattro anni, era troppo conosciuta e v’erano troppe
conoscenze di genere equivoco! continuando ad abitar ivi, era a temersi
che la figlia, o presto o tardi, venisse a sapere cos’era sua madre,
e che certi vicini poco scrupolosi, o col mal esempio d’una esistenza
tutt’altro che misteriosa, quando avrebbe avuto bisogno di tutto
il mistero, o, con peggio, avessero poi a corromperla — cose molto
probabili in quella casa.

la abbandonò quindi e se ne andò ad abitare, dove nessuno la conosceva,
dove non conosceva alcuno, ma sapendo di entrare in una casa, come si
dice, assai pulita.

tali delicatezze non devono destare meraviglia. tutti possono aver
visto donne cadute tanto basso, da non esservi modo di cadere più giù
— ed essere così tenere dell’onestà delle loro figlie, da far quello
che molte buone madri non sanno nemmen pensare, per rimovere dai loro
giovani anni fin l’ombra d’un pericolo, smaniose di farne tutto ciò che
si può imaginare di virtuoso e con maggior probabilità di riuscita che
non il comune delle madri, perchè sapendone _di più_, possono essere
più avvedute, più caute, e certo più saggie consigliere.

maddalena aveva, senza dubbio, le migliori intenzioni circa
l’educazione di silvia — ma le ansie d’un egoismo sfrenato guastarono
poi tutto, come abbiamo veduto e come, pur troppo, vedremo.

il quartiere, la casa furono così abilmente scelti — e il nuovo
contegno di maddalena così prudente, che ella conseguì il suo intento:
di passare, cioè, per una donna onesta.

la signora maddalena fu, pei pochi vicini, una vedova agiata «oh! una
buona donna,» che aveva una bella figliuola, «quieta e buona come un
angelo».

cosa naturale, e anche per salvarsi dalla noja opprimente di una vita
isolata, monotona, senza movimento, maddalena fece conoscenza a poco a
poco di alcuni vicini, e, fra gli altri, di una eccellente vecchia, la
signora mantovani, vedova come lei, che viveva sola colla fantesca.

la signora mantovani aveva una figlia, eugenia, maritata, che veniva a
trovarla tutti i giorni, e, colla quale, maddalena e silvia strinsero
in breve una buona amicizia. tale amicizia divenne, anzi, intima con
maddalena, quando, per una certa storia, affatto estranea al nostro
racconto, eugenia ebbe bisogno d’una confidente sicura, alla quale dare
incarichi molto delicati.

silvia non aveva ancora sedici anni quando la suddetta storia si fece
molto seria, complicatissima, — era allo stato di partita in quattro,
con un quinto che voleva entrarvi per forza e minacciava di scompigliar
tutto — ed eugenia si trovò nella necessitò di recarsi ad un veglione,
per vedere, per sapere, per rimediare, per calmare, per consigliarsi,
per accordarsi.... tutte cose molto urgenti e impossibili a farsi in
casa. eugenia, naturalmente, supplicò maddalena che l’accompagnasse,
perchè, andando in teatro, sola col marito, non potrebbe essere libera
un minuto — ed allora tanto valeva restar a casa. — d’altre amiche non
si fidava.

maddalena disse:

— ma.... e dove metto mia figlia? non posso lasciarla sola in
casa. —

ed eugenia rispose:

— pregheremo la mamma di tenerla presso di sè per una notte. è così
buona e vuol tanto bene alla silvia che non dirò di no. —

infatti, la signora mantovani, all’oscuro di tutto, acconsentì col
massimo piacere «per permettere alla cara signora maddalena di passare
almeno una sera allegra nel carnevale.»

il marito di eugenia ringraziò vivamente maddalena d’aver accettato
l’invito di sua moglie. — un torrione vostro pari — aggiunse — potrà
supplire il povero marito, che non sarà costretto a far il cavaliere
servente alla consorte.... cosa che non si usa. —

maddalena supplì infatti, e le due signore, in dominò, non fecero che
girare per la festa, sole e non sospette per alcuno. così eugenia potè
vedere, sapere, rimediare, calmare, consigliarsi ed accordarsi.

l’accordo principale era per le tre, quando, finite le cene, vi sarebbe
stata tal confusione, da permettere anche le sparizioni inosservate.

alle tre, maddalena e l’amica, uscite dal loro camerino, andavano pel
loro destino, ossia pel destino di eugenia, quando s’imbatterono in
un signore, al veder il quale, maddalena emise un leggier grido di
sorpresa, e fermossi, dicendogli in falsetto:

— sei tu o non sei tu?

— pare che sia io.... — rispose il signore ridendo.

— proprio tu, soranzi?

— soranzi.

— che bell’uomo ti sei fatto!

— se non avessi moglie, ti direi qual è il dovere d’una donna che trova
bello un uomo.

— sei fedele?

— ecco una domanda, a cui una donna sola può rispondere....

— perchè....?

— perchè tanto il sì, quanto il no, in un uomo sono ridicoli....

— e in una donna....?

— in una donna.... il sì è un poema angelico.... il no.... un dramma.

— io vado — disse eugenia all’orecchio della compagna — altrimenti
l’ora passa. tu resta pure col signore, se t’interessa.

— quasi quasi.... per ingannare il tempo.

— bene, fra mezz’ora, vieni a prendermi, fila terza, numero cinque, a
destra.

— siamo intese.... sii felice. —

eugenia s’allontanò.

— è qui tua moglie....? — disse maddalena a soranzi.

— passò quel tempo, per lei —

— allora dammi il braccio, se non hai paura delle male lingue, e
andiamo nel tuo palco. non posso girare, senza comprometter la mia
amica, che è affidata a me.

— si vede che è ben affidata!

— che vuoi.... io non so resistere alle lagrime degli infelici.

— ecco il mio camerino....

— no.... no, non entro.... vedo là un signore....

— non temere.... è l’avvocato bussola.... che la perde sempre.

— che cosa....?

— la bussola.... è celebre per le sbornie che guadagna, in compenso
delle cause che perde. come vedi, è in uno stato che lo renderà molto
prudente, qualunque cosa qui possa avvenire.

— ah! non avverrà niente.... — e ciò dicendo, maddalena entrò.

— bevi?

— bevo.

soranzi sturò una bottiglia di _champagne_.

— è un pezzo che non vai al _restaurant bouquet_? — fe’ maddalena
lentamente, come soprapensiero, senza guardarlo.

egli, che stava per mescerle, si fermò, esaminando, sorpreso, quel
dominò.

— versa pure, sai,...

— chi sei tu?

— io sono una che era molto vicina a te.... una volta.... quando tu
andasti al _restaurant bouquet_ con una signora....

— siccome non ci ero mai andato prima di quella volta, e non vi sono
più andato dopo.... e quella volta, io non ho veduto nessuna donna....

— eppure....

— sentiamo un po’.... quando è stato?

— precisamente quattor.... no.... quindici anni fa....

— dimmi chi sei!

— te lo dirò.... _un giorno_.

— ah! sei maddalena! — gridò soranzi giojoso e non senza commozione.

— chi sa! — disse ella, con voce naturale.

— leva.... leva quella maschera.... che io ti possa rivedere....

— no.... se la levo.... tu fuggi.

— perchè?

— perchè sono brutta.... d’una bruttezza.... classica.

— non ti credo.

— non credi a maddalena, tu? a maddalena, che direbbe la sua anche a
gesù cristo? — eh! sono rovinata, caro mio.... tanto.... che mi sono
lasciata andare.... senti come sono floscia.... per tutto il resto....
ti basti il dire che fiuto tabacco.

— non importa! levati....

— in una festa, no.... sarebbe una apparizione troppo orribile per te,
che mi hai conosciuta bella!

— e.... che cosa hai fatto, tutti questi anni?

— non lo sai?!

— no.... come vuoi ch’io sappia?....

— pare impossibile.... ho fatto un po’ di tutto.... non per salvare
l’anima.... per perderla. adesso.... che non posso più far niente,
tanto di ricuperarla.... faccio la donna onesta.... faccio la mamma,
ecco!

— ah! è vero.... tu avevi una figlia.... che ora deve essere quasi una
donna.... è bella?

— un sole.... eh! è il mio dolor di capo.

— per qual ragione?

— oh! bella!.... per la ragione che è, si può dir, da marito.... e
se me la tolgono, mi tolgono anche il pane, perchè ora viviamo in due
col frutto della sua dote.... — a meno che — stridette, dopo una breve
pausa — non le capiti un marito generoso, il quale faccia star bene
anche la madre.... cosa molto difficile.

— come l’hai educata?

— oh! bene.... meglio di sua madre, certo.

— vuoi lasciarmela conoscere?.... chi sa che non glielo trovi io il
marito.... generoso.

— se tu fossi tanto bravo.... io ti benedirei!

— lascia far a me.... per la maddalena della mia giovinezza, io farò
questo e altro.

— bene, soranzi! tu almeno hai un cuore.... ah! addio.... devo andare.

— dammi il tuo indirizzo.

— ahi sì.... vieni in via.... numero 7, primo piano.

— domani.... cioè, oggi alle quattro, io sarò da te.

— grazie.... ah! se tu non mi avessi scritto quella brutta lettera....
quanto saremmo stati felici.... e io quanto sarei migliore!

— la tua risposta però fu ben orgogliosa. a proposito, hai poi lavorato?

— io?.... altro che lavorato! ah! ah! ah! — e ridendo sgangheratamente,
maddalena fuggì in cerca dell’amica.




arrivati a questo punto, noi non possiamo più narrare, descrivere,
occupandoci di _tutti_ i particolari. dobbiamo accontentarci di prender
delle note più o meno aride, a seconda delle situazioni...., sperando
che bastino.

                                 * * *

l’indomani del veglione — congedandosi da maddalena, dopo la prima
visita — non presente la figlia.

or. lo sposo glielo troveremo.... non ti nascondo però che lo sposo
vorrei esser io.

madd. e io te la darei con entusiasmo, se tu non avessi moglie.

or. ahi! tasto doloroso.... a rivederci. —

soranzi, partendo, dice ch’egli è pazzo, ch’egli non deve lasciarsi,
come un giovinetto, inebriare dalla bellezza di quella fanciulla,
al punto d’aver il convulso...., si dice che egli ha quarant’anni,
che ha moglie.... che.... che...., insomma, tutto quello che un uomo
onesto può dirsi, per cancellare una impressione più profonda del
bisognevole e irragionevole — perchè la ragione deve permettere solo
ciò che i contratti sociali danno per lecito. — ma se la ragione
propone, il fisico dispone. — soranzi torna a casa; appunto perchè non
vuol esserlo, è preoccupato; il suo appartamento, per la prima volta,
gli par tetro, una spelonca — e anche il dolce sorriso di sua moglie,
per la prima volta, lo muove a ira. non parla che per rispondere
brevemente, con cortesia stentata.... esce, vaga, rientra, si rinchiude
per lavorare....; è inutile!.... l’imagine di quella vergine di sedici
anni lo perseguita, s’è ficcata nella sua mente.... non vuol uscirne
più. ah! gli acerbi e già maturi vezzi.... ah! quelle mani fatte da
amore per l’amore.... quelle babbuccie, entro le quali si troverebbe
appena tanto da potervi imprimere un bacio.... e i ricciolini....
d’aria di quella nuca, e la freschezza di quel viso, e la lanuggine
impercettibile di quelle guance fatte per smorzar i baci, e gli occhi
grigi erranti che pajono ansiosi.... e non lo sono ansiosi, perchè il
sorriso è puro, è il sorriso della donna che ignora. lo si capisce,
dai suoi entusiasmi, che non sa niente....; tutto per lei è bello,
nuovo, sorprendente. — e tuttavia, qualche cosa vi deve essere che si
muove in lei....., ella deve udire come un susurrío interno, sia pure
indistinto, ma che a volte la turba....

e soranzi ricordava che, a qualche sua occhiata ardente, le di lei
palpebre avevano avuto un tremito, e che mentre egli parlava, ella
ascoltava, come meditabonda, coll’occhio che pareva bere, e che, senza
ch’ella lo sapesse, la di lei lingua errava lambendo il labbro.

brividi e vampe.... silvia! silvia!

                                 * * *

sono trascorsi quindici giorni dall’incontro di maddalena con oreste,
al veglione — e in casa soranzi si vive già d’una vita nuova.... ma
d’una vita che toglie il respiro.

la moglie e la servitù, che per tanti anni vissero in un ambiente di
perfetta pace, di dolcezza tale che avrebbe ammansato l’essere più
insocievole.... ora non sanno più in che mondo si trovano.

soranzi sta fuori gran parte del giorno, il resto lo passa rinchiuso
nel suo studio. ben di rado si lascia vedere o fa udire la sua voce, ma
anche quel poco è di troppo.

egli è irascibile, impetuoso — in tutti i suoi moti, in tutti i suoi
detti v’è alcun che di così secco, di così nervoso e, a volte, di
così feroce, perfino.... che davvero fa paura. i servi, alle sue
scampanellate, accorrono, ascoltano, si inchinano, s’affrettano ad
obbedire.... qualunque cosa ordinasse, non replicherebbero sillaba....
— e pensare che, un tempo, si parlava fra padrone e servitori come da
amico ad amici, e si discorreva tranquillamente sul da farsi e il non
da farsi.

_quando_ pranza in casa, non dice una parola.

un giorno, la moglie gli ha detto, colla sua maggior soavità:

— che cos’hai, oreste?

— nulla ho. lasciami stare. —

un cognato, dietro le preghiere della sorella, gli ha domandato, un
altro giorno, ridendo:

— vedo che sei arrabbiato...., hai forse giocato alla borsa?

— che! — e girando sui tacchi, l’ha piantato là come un matto.

tutti sono certi che egli ha un dispiacere, che non vuole, non può
confidare ad alcuno....

— un po’ di pazienza.... tutto passerà. —

pare che non abbian avuto torto.

un giorno, soranzi, da un’ora all’altra, è tornato quel di prima.
esultanza generale. come mai questo?

rovistando fra le sue carte, gli è venuta fra le mani una lettera di
suo padre — e gli son venute sott’occhio queste parole:

«quando, al primo riveder quella donna, tu sentisti ridestarsi l’antico
affetto — dovevi fuggirla. era già moglie. il sacrificio, allora,
sarebbe stato ben lieve, credilo!»

«non hai avuto quella meschinissima forza.... e or vedi le conseguenze
orribili della tua debolezza!»

legge tutta la lettera.... la rilegge. povero padre! povera madre!....
se esistessero ancora, egli forse, mirando quei volti mesti, si
sentirebbe meno debole.... s’immerge in una profonda meditazione.
tenta, vuole ragionare.

da una parte.... sua moglie così buona — la sua posizione sociale —
il suo passato onorevole e un avvenire splendido, perchè egli è uno
degli uomini più stimati ed è già designato ai più alti ufficj....
— dall’altra parte, una giovinetta, la quale viene a togliergli, a
rovinare tutto.... con che? perchè?

si apre l’uscio ed entra il suocero, vegliardo veramente venerando,
per vita operosa, intemerata e per alto sentire. a tale apparizione,
oreste sente un non so che di refrigerante nell’anima; gli pare che
un genio benefico venga ad additargli la via della salvezza. ma sì!
basta rinchiudersi nel seno della famiglia, non pensare più a nulla,
lavorare, non permettere che alcuna distrazione....

e gli va incontro affettuoso, riconoscente — eccolo di buon umore,
cortese, affabile, espansivo.

sua moglie è felice a tal cambiamento subitaneo — aspettato, del resto!
dice: — la gioja è tornata in casa soranzi e, speriamo, per sempre.

— che cosa mi dicevi tu? — è il padre che parla colla figlia — oreste
mi pare sempre il migliore dei mariti.

— è vero!... non so.... qualche cosa l’avrà disturbato. ma poteva ben
dirmi....

— eh! le donne vogliono saper tutto.... lasciate passare, quando vedete
nubi fosche.... se no, andrete a rischio di far delle burrasche con....
niente.

                                 * * *

è scorsa un’altra settimana. tutti i giorni è stata una lotta
fierissima.

a certa ora, egli udiva sempre quella cara voce infantile.... gli
pareva sempre di accarezzare quella manina, di provocare quegli
scoppietti di riso, di sentir quell’alito fresco, odoroso.

era una tortura.... ma egli non si muoveva — l’ora passava — aveva
vinto.

dopo otto vittorie, gli pare che il vincere costi meno, e che forse, in
breve, egli sarà perfettamente libero da quell’incubo ad ora fissa.

a tale scoperta, egli diventa ilare, respira a pieni polmoni — e va ad
abbracciar la moglie.

dopo pranzo, ella e lui stanno presso il caminetto sorbendo il caffè —
egli racconta una gaja storiella.

— una lettera pel signor avvocato.... — fa la cameriera entrando.

— _particolare:_ — legge soranzi. la scrittura non gli è ignota, ma non
ricorda di chi possa essere.... apre, impallidisce.

      «soranzi,

  «tu non sei un uomo onesto. tu m’hai stregato la figlia.... e
  adesso non ti lasci più vedere?

  «ella soffre, non prende cibo, dimagra.

  «non parla!.... ma l’occhio di una madre sa indovinare....

  «sarà una bella gloria per te, quando me la porteranno via!

                                                               «m.»

— il mio cappello.... il mio soprabito — comanda oreste, vibrato,
balzando in piedi.

— dove vai? — domanda la moglie.

— dove mi chiama un affare urgente.

— ma è qualche cosa di ben grave, di ben dispiacente! sei tutto
alterato.....

— tu sei pazza.

— no, oreste, non dir così.... sai pure.... se hai qualche dolore,
confidati con me.

— non ho niente....

— ma....

— hai capito che non ho niente!? — grida oreste, stralunando.

— dio mio.... con te non si può più parlare! — geme la poverina,
rompendo in lagrime.

— eh! il miglior modo di parlare per una moglie, è tacere!

— ma tu adunque vuoi che io muoja....

— io?

— ma sì!.... perchè se continua così, come si può vivere?

— ebbene.... se.... se non si può vivere, così, con me.... regolati
come credi.

— ah! no, oreste! — e la moglie si aggrappa a lui disperata — no,
oreste, senti.... senti per pietà.

— lasciami.... lasciami.... — e respingendola con forza, sicchè ella
cade inginocchioni, strappa dalle mani della cameriera quanto essa gli
reca e fogge.

la cameriera rialza la signora semisvenuta, la adagia in una poltrona e
le spruzza il viso con acqua. la signora ricupera gli spiriti.

— desidera qualche cosa, signora padrona?

— no.... aspetta.... —

dopo una lunga pausa.

— di’ al giovanni che vada a pregar mio padre di venir.... da me,
stasera. quanto a te.... non una parola con nessuno!




vediamo un po’ che cosa abbia fatto maddalena, dopo il veglione, perchè
quel suo biglietto a soranzi è abbastanza strano.

in omaggio al vero, riconosciamo che ella ha accettato la prima visita
di oreste senza alcun secondo fine biasimevole. l’unico suo fine
era precisamente quello di valersi di soranzi come di un sensale di
matrimoni incaricato di trovare il «marito generoso».

ella è ben lieta che soranzi trovi bella e buona sua figlia — questo
vuol dire che s’interesserà, con ardore, per collocarla bene.

ma la frequenza — quattro di fila — la lunghezza delle di lui visite
le pajon soverchie per un mediatore, oltrechè «compromettenti» —
e il suo genere di conversazione un po’ troppo poetico. maddalena
s’impensierisce seriamente, tanto più che vedendo la figlia tutt’altro
che indifferente alle premure di lui — premure, delle quali non sa come
combattere l’influenza sul di lei animo, dopo averle presentato soranzi
come «un distintissimo signore, suo amico d’infanzia e tanto amico
anche del povero papà....»

il combatterla ora sarebbe pericoloso. maddalena che è donna, le sa
queste cose.

bisognava prevenirla, indisporla contro di lui. si potrebbe, è vero,
con una parola sola, demolire soranzi; basterebbe dire: — guarda che
egli è ammogliato — ma allora, soranzi trovando subitanea freddezza,
s’indispettirebbe, vorrebbe saperne la ragione.... e se ne andrebbe per
sempre — il che è da evitarsi, perchè maddalena, ora che ha riafferrato
soranzi, non vuol più lasciarselo sfuggire. in un caso estremo, ella
potrebbe ricorrere a lui, senza umiliazione.

invece, farà così: interrogherà cautamente soranzi.... e _se mai_....
ella lo farà ragionare, e, toccandogli le corde del dovere, dell’onore,
ecc., ecc., lo indurrà a diradare le sue visite.... pur non ritirando
la sua protezione.

quando non lo vedrà più, o ben di rado, silvia non vi penserà altro.

                                 * * *

partendo dopo la sua quinta visita, soranzi dice a maddalena:

— spero bene che non le avrai detto che io ho moglie.

— perchè?

— il perchè te lo dirò.... _un giorno_.

— ah! ah!.... e se glielo avessi già detto?

— disdici.

— ohe! soranzi.... avresti per caso delle malinconie pel capo?.... se
così fosse.... io dovrei rinunciare all’onore....

— se tu sapessi....!

— che cosa?

— senti, maddalena.... io sono sempre stato, dopo _quel_ tempo.......
l’uomo il più freddo. mi credevo morto alle passioni. ebbene.... ora mi
vedi ridotto come un fanciullo, incapace di ragionare.... disperato....
quasi al punto di domandarmi che ne farò della mia vita.

— senti, soranzi.... da quella brava donna che sono.... ti dirò: non
venir più.... ma pensa che hai moglie!

— ah! non parlarmene.... ma non sai che da due giorni, vaneggio....
che io odio mia moglie.... tanto che, mi pare che per silvia.... io
sacrificherei....

— va.... va.... tu bestemmi.

                                 * * *

_tu bestemmi_ — ma, non appena soranzi è partito, maddalena si sdraja,
nella sua poltrona, pensando alla fatta scoperta. «soranzi odia sua
moglie, e per silvia è pronto a tutto».

sì.... e maddalena non può ingannarsi....; nel tremore della voce,
delle mani, nel balenìo degli sguardi, ella ha indovinato la passione
vera, possente, quella passione che non conosce ostacoli, e siccome
soranzi è uomo d’onore — anche i ribaldi hanno bisogno dell’_onore_....
degli altri — così tal passione non è a disdegnarsi.

se soranzi non ama sua moglie, potrebbe.... separarsene. — se ama
silvia, potrebbe divenirne l’amico, il protettore. — la colpa, dopo
tutto, dice maddalena, è della legge. l’uomo è lo schiavo delle
passioni.... e la legge vuol incatenare le passioni, il che significa
incatenar torrenti.... tanto peggio per la legge.

se soranzi farà _questo_, è certo che io mi troverò al coperto per
sempre. quanto a silvia.... ella sarà ben grata a sua madre.... maggior
felicità potrebbe forse darle altro uomo.... se ella amasse soranzi? —
restano la società e la moglie....; ma la società è composta di tanti
individui, di cui ognuno farà molto bene pensando ai casi suoi.... del
resto, padroni! non renderanno perciò meno felici soranzi e silvia, e
non torceranno un capello a me. — quanto alla moglie, poi, se non sa
farsi amare.... io non so proprio cosa farci!

                                 * * *

aggiustati, così, i conti colla propria coscienza, maddalena si accinse
all’opera.... opera facile — non c’era che da secondare tacitamente,
mantenendo tuttavia, per decoro, una certa vigilanza che, mentre non
doveva nuocere all’_essenza_, doveva rendere impossibile la _forma_....
finchè, soranzi scoppiando, non si sarebbe dato, piedi e mani legati, a
maddalena.

naturalmente, occorreva qualche incoraggiamento indiretto, onde le
impressioni si disegnassero più presto e meglio nel cuore di silvia.
questo ella ottenne con dei brevi soliloqui fatti, quasi non avvertisse
la presenza della figlia.

un giorno, per esempio, esclamava:

— che bontà quel caro soranzi, che ingegno, che spirito, che
distinzione! —

un altro:

— quello è proprio l’uomo che _andrebbe bene_ per silvia. io non darò
mai consigli a mia figlia.... perchè il cuore è libero.... ma se mia
figlia me ne chiedesse.... —

un altro ancora:

— quanti anni può avere soranzi?.... quaranta, mi pare.... non se
gliene darebbero trentacinque.... proprio, la bella età dell’uomo....
di cui una donna può fidarsi.... —

una sera poi le disse:

— mi pare che soranzi non ti guardi di malocchio.... eh! briccona! — e
tu?.... ah! non vuoi rispondere.... diventi rossa!.... basta.... fate
voi. —

                                 * * *

una fanciulla, che è già ben disposta a favore d’un uomo che la
corteggia.... non ha bisogno di molta esca per accendersi — se poi
vede che la madre è fanatica per quell’uomo.... non ha più difese
di sorta.... e non cerca difesa.... come non ha alcun turbamento di
coscienza, perchè ella sa già d’aver una complice.

la coscienza dei figli, quasi sempre, non è che la coscienza delle
madri.

era un piacere intenso ma tutto intellettuale quello che provava silvia
durante le prime visite di soranzi. ben arrivato quel bel signore
che veniva a rompere la monotonia della sua esistenza. e poichè egli
aveva facondia, esperienza della vita, l’abilità dell’uomo di mondo
ed il fuoco dell’innamorato, non poteva che sedurre la mente della
giovinetta, nell’età in cui, sebbene inconsciamente, si è tanto avidi
di impressioni nuove e di emozioni.

il cuore non aveva ancor palpitato, ma palpitò subito.... quando
maddalena cominciò a delirare per oreste.... ella non si diceva che
era l’amante di soranzi.... ma lo amava.... — non si diceva che egli
l’amava, ma sentivo d’essere, per lui, l’oggetto d’un culto. non
v’erano dichiarazioni, perchè non ve ne potevano essere, ma gli occhi
di lui avevano tal eloquenza, che ella, or arrossiva, or si faceva
smorta e, lui partito, restava lunghe ore pensosa.

quando maddalena vide che soranzi, accortosi della muta corrispondenza
di silvia, si faceva.... poco prudente, pensò che era tempo di
richiamarlo al dovere, _in modo_ che egli, trovandosi al muro, avesse a
prendere una decisione.

— insomma, soranzi, come la facciamo qui? — gli disse, — per bacco,
abbi un po’ di coscienza.... io ho paura che tu mi faccia innamorare
la figlia.... e poi.... cosa succederà? io t’ho già fatto capire.... ma
vedo che tu vai avanti per la tua strada.... e io ti dico: fermati!

— fermarmi? non veder più silvia? ma ti pare possibile? ma piuttosto....

— taci....

— no.... piuttosto.... mi divido da mia moglie.

— ma tu sei pazzo.

— e allora cosa vuoi ch’io faccia? io sento che se continua così,
finirò ad uccidermi.... ma.... bada bene che in tal caso.... silvia non
sarà d’altri! —

maddalena, a queste parole, diè un passo indietro e stette come
atterrita — mentre, nel suo interno, gioiva.

per alcuni minuti sembrò che non potesse trovar verbo, tanta era
la sua commozione — poi disse, smozzicando, con accento di dolorosa
rassegnazione:

— tu vuoi rovinarmi.... ebbene.... fa pure.... noi, già, siamo due
povere donne senza difesa.

— io voglio render felice la silvia, contenta te per sempre! — fe’ con
slancio soranzi, il quale, finalmente, vedeva rimossi gli ostacoli,
vicino il compimento de’ suoi ardenti voti; e, strettale con forza la
mano, uscì precipitosamente giubilante.

maddalena, rientrando, abbracciò strettamente silvia, baciandola e
ribaciandola. silvia la guardò maravigliata, sorridendo, e le disse:

— che cos’hai?

— nulla.... so io!

                                 * * *

l’indomani, si attendeva soranzi — non sapremmo dire chi lo desiderasse
di più — ma non venne. pranzarono più tardi del solito e male. — non
capisco.... non capisco: — borbottava, di tanto in tanto, maddalena.

il giorno seguente, l’attesero ancora.... e ancora mancò. neppure il
terzo dì, comparve, nè il quarto, nè il settimo. maddalena sbuffava, ed
il suo occhio aveva dei lampi sinistri.

silvia non parlava, ma ogni giorno diveniva sempre più mesta, nè
toccava quasi cibo.

maddalena la guardava e cominciava a sentire dei rimorsi. — se soranzi
non tornasse più.... e la figlia morisse di passione.... uccisa da sua
madre!.... no.... no! — ella non pativa più scrupoli d’alcun genere....
ma, efferata non era ancora.... per lo meno, fino a tal punto.

d’altronde, la figlia, dopo che il mondo l’aveva abbandonata, era
divenuta una necessità morale per lei. non v’era merito, ma era così.

la mattina dopo, uscì, e recatasi a casa soranzi, domandò al portinaio
se il signor avvocato fosse assente o ammalato.

— nè assente, nè ammalato — fu la risposta.

— non capisco.... non capisco — ripeteva fra sè maddalena, tornando a
casa. — che fare?

madre e figlia lavorarono silenziose, sospirando. verso le quattro,
silvia s’alzò e disse con voce velata:

— scusa, mamma.... io vado a letto.

— perchè, silvia?

— perchè.... non so.... mi sento male.

— è debolezza, sono otto giorni che digiuni, si può dire. prendi
qualche cosa....

— impossibile.... credi.

— bene.... va pure.... io esco un momento.... non temere, torno subito,
spero portarti a casa una buona medicina.

— quale?

— so io.... —

fu allora che scrisse e portò quel biglietto, che mise sossopra casa
soranzi e richiamò oreste presso maddalena.

                                 * * *

quando maddalena, alle sei e mezzo, sentì quella scampanellata, balzò
in piedi, con un ruggito di gioja.

— ah! sei tu.... finalmente! — fece, aprendo con furia — ci voleva
proprio che morisse!

— perdona.... se tu sapessi.... dov’è?

— qui a letto.

— ah!.... —

silvia giaceva assopita.

cogli occhi chiusi, col nuovo pallore delle guance smunte, ancor rigate
di pianto, aveva qualche cosa d’etereo, che destò in oreste la più
profonda pietà.

allora egli sentì che quella creatura lo distaccava da tutto il mondo.

— vedi? — gli disse maddalena. poscia si mise ad accarezzare la fronte
della figlia e chiamò dolce, dolce:

— silvia.... silvia.

— che vuoi?.... — sospirò quella, aprendo gli occhi, poi, visto lui: —
ah! — e il suo volto si suffuse di subito rossore.

— sei guarita, _adesso_?.... — continuò la madre sorridendo.

— sì.... — fe’ silvia, guardando lui con riconoscenza.

— allora, prenderai qualche cosa.... e anch’io con te, — perchè devi
sapere — aggiunse voltasi a soranzi — che, in questa casa, sono otto
giorni che non si mangia più o quasi. —

maddalena uscita — oreste non potè più frenarsi.... curvossi e depose
un ardente bacio.... il primo bacio, sulle labbra della fanciulla, che
ebbe un brivido e chiuse gli occhi.

— tuo.... tuo per sempre! — le susurrò oreste con passione — poi si
tolse di là...., sentiva offuscarsi la ragione, ed ebbro, vacillante,
raggiunse maddalena.

— sai la bella novità?.... — disse maddalena alla figlia, quando
rientrò nella di lei camera, con un tavolino, su cui era pronta una
refezione — dopo domani, partiremo per la campagna. soranzi ci invita a
passarvi la primavera, in una villina, che mi dice essere un _bijou_.

silvia giunse le mani e levò gli occhi al cielo....

ma non pregava perchè.... era esaudita.




rientrando in casa, soranzi, quella sera, trovò giovanni in anticamera
che lo attendeva e che gli porse una lettera, dicendogli gravemente:

— la sua signora non c’è; è uscita col suo signor padre.... lasciandomi
questo biglietto da consegnarle, immediatamente, al di lei ritorno.

— va bene — disse secco soranzi, dirigendosi verso lo studio, in cui si
rinchiuse al solito.

quindi, aperse e lesse:

      «caro genero,

  «se hai dei dolori morali, perchè vuoi che abbia a soffrire la mia
  povera costanza, la quale non ti ha mai cagionato il benchè menomo
  dispiacere in quattordici anni di unione?

  «le hai detto di _regolarsi come crede_....?

  «spiegati.

  «è interesse di tutti, anche tuo, che simili scene disgustose —
  senza ragione apparente! — non abbiano a rinnovarsi — e certamente
  si devono poter evitare.

                                                   «_tuo suocero_.»

                         _risposta di oreste._

      «carissimo,

  «sì, mi spiegherò.

  «e mi sarei spiegato con mia moglie questa sera stessa, anche
  non invitato, perchè non ne potevo più e perchè.... mi ripugna
  la odiosa e ridicola commedia del marito che _fa_ l’uomo rigido,
  l’uomo dei principi, l’uomo morale, il cascante colla moglie, alla
  luce del giorno — mentre tiene una o più amanti nelle tenebre.

  «no, io disdegno ogni finzione, ogni ipocrisia — ed ho il coraggio
  di dire: ieri io era un buon marito — oggi non lo sono più!

  «tu dirai che io sono un uomo disonesto, perchè calpesto i miei
  doveri, perchè dimentico i miei giuramenti, perchè rendo infelice
  la tua buonissima figlia — ed io ti do ragione. ragione, perchè sei
  padre, perchè realmente è una enormità.... ma ti dico:

  «se tu sei da tanto da strapparmi questa passione dal cuore, se
  tu sei da tanto da rimettervi il primiero affetto che nutrivo per
  costanza.... avanti!

  «riesci e io ti benedirò.

  «ma, hai capito — non di consigli ho bisogno, ma di tanaglie....
  dio, io non ci vedo più.

  «scusa, mio caro, se io ti scrivo in questo modo, se io ferisco
  così crudelmente il tuo amore di padre.... ma credilo, io mi sento
  proprio impazzire....

  «e io l’amo sempre, vedi, tua figlia — ed è questo che rende più
  orribile ancora la mia posizione, più intollerabile l’esistenza,
  perchè io non posso pensare a quell’angelo, senza odio di me
  stesso — non posso, senza disprezzarmi, ricordare che io sono
  stato villano, inumano con lei.... — ma la sua presenza è la
  condanna della mia passione, ed io devo fuggire per non veder più
  quell’eterno, vivente rimprovero.

  «tu, l’uomo onestissimo, che, in tutta la tua esistenza, non
  hai mai avuto un istante d’esitazione nel compiere il tuo dovere
  — non solo non comprenderai, ma anche riuscendo a comprendere,
  rifiuterai d’ammettere che un uomo della mia età, e del carattere
  che tu conosci, possa calpestare improvvisamente tutto, per seguire
  una.... gonnella!

  «gli è perchè tu non sai in qual modo io sono arrivato a questo
  punto.

  «io so che, quando l’anima tua si aperse al primo amore, tu avesti
  anche la più ampia soddisfazione che il cuore umano possa bramare.

  «_la_ amasti.... e _la_ ottenesti!

  «il tuo cuore si conservò puro, così, la tua mente conservò tutte
  le sue illusioni, il sangue una perfetta calma — e vivendo della
  vita che era il sogno della tua giovinezza, tu potesti non vedere e
  non curare i pericoli di cui è sempre irta l’esistenza di tutti....
  — ma io?!

  «io potei, a mala pena, sognare, qualche istante, questa vita
  del cuore, che è indispensabile agli uomini, uomini come noi,
  s’intende, incorrotti. — sognare, dico, perchè la donna, per la
  quale mi struggevo, dapprima mi fu rapita — e quando, incontratala
  una seconda volta, avrei potuto possederla.... mi fu tolta, ancora,
  da una tremenda sventura.

  «non chiedermene di più, perchè, ne soffro troppo.... soffro,
  perchè penso che se allora i miei voti fossero stati appagati,
  io non sarei ridotto a questo punto — soffro, perchè quella
  donna, delusa, allora, al par di me, ora è diventata un oggetto
  spregevole, mentre, a me unita, sarebbe ancor una donna onesta —
  soffro, perchè non posso risparmiare costanza!

  «tu dirai: ma adunque, perchè sposasti mia figlia?

  «ti rispondo: — ero in uno stato di prostrazione morale — il mio
  cuore non batteva più — mi sentivo profondamente, amareggiato e
  disgustato di tutto — vedevo, innanzi a me, una lunga vita morta.

  «tua figlia mi apparve come un angelo di consolazione, come una
  suora di carità, che avrebbe potuto, col balsamo della sua anima
  soave, guarire l’anima mia.

  «guarii sì.... ma non vissi.

  «tuttavia, non fui egoista.... commosso all’affetto che tua figlia
  portava a quest’uomo freddo, insensibile, mi forzai, per non
  renderla infelice, ad aver, almeno, l’apparenza d’un altro uomo. fu
  uno sforzo che mi costò.... e guaj per ambedue se mia moglie non
  fosse stata costanza.... ma ella esigeva così poco.... le bastò
  ch’io mi mostrassi _amabile_.

  «a te.... non fui onesto?

  «e credo che se la nostra unione fosse stata benedetta.... forse
  il mio cuore si sarebbe sgelato davvero e tutto — ma, nemmeno un
  figlio venne a rallegrare la nostra casa e tanti anni scorsero in
  un’atmosfera di tiepida cortesia.

  «si nasce per questo?!

  «ah! no — e io lo sentivo tanto che volli essere quello che non
  ero.... — volli essere ambizioso, volli fare l’uomo pubblico con
  tutte le sue piccole vanità, le sue passioncelle, e vi misi il
  maggior ardore. — si trattava di riempire tutto il tempo che io
  doveva, per forza, starmene sulla terra! — riuscii.

  «mi credeva sicuro del fatto mio, quando.... bastò una visione a
  distruggere tutto e ad attirarmi, colle sue irresistibili lusinghe,
  in un mare di fuoco.

  «ora vi sono — brucia il mio sangue, brucia l’anima mia.... dovrò
  starvi finchè non sarò consunto.

  «e non credere che io non abbia lottato.... — ma è stato inutile.
  natura non si delude impunemente. il mio cuore e il mio sangue
  essendo stati violentati per tanti anni — le potenze misteriose,
  nell’inerzia si sono moltiplicate, agglomerate, fatte giganti.... —
  ora, esse voglion battaglia....

  «non rileggo.... a che varrebbe d’altronde?

  «sono come istupidito.

  «l’uomo che ha vissuto, comprenda questa immensa miseria umana e
  consigli mitezza al padre offeso. ma se il magistrato deve cercar
  pena condegna.... pensi che chi pare carnefice.... è forse solo una
  vittima.

  «del resto, mi sottometterò a tutto.

                                                    «_tuo genero_.»

lo suocero rispose:

  «l’uomo ha compreso. — il padre non può essere più severo della
  figlia.

  «ammira questa donna, che, colpita nel più profondo del cuore....
  trova ancor modo di sorridere — ben mestamente.... è vero!
  — dicendo: — io vedo nell’anima sua e compassiono. è vittima
  d’un’illusione. guarirà. aspetterò rassegnata sinchè egli torni a
  me — perchè egli tornerà! —

  «noi partiamo per la campagna, ove resteremo finchè....

  «ti regolerai in modo che nulla trapeli di questo momentaneo
  dissapore.

  «dico momentaneo, perchè, tutto ben ponderato, credo che mia figlia
  finirà coll’aver ragione.... purchè non finisca, prima, di....»




era il crepuscolo d’una sera d’aprile.

nel cielo purissimo, uscivan le prime stelle. respirando quell’aria
tiepida e olezzante, i giovani sentivansi agitati da strani sussulti,
e.... gli altri ricordavan, melanconicamente, il tempo trapassato delle
vibrazioni simpatiche.

nella graziosa villina che, da alcuni giorni, un signore aveva presa
in affitto, sulla sfonda del piccolo lago di v...., regnava un perfetto
silenzio.

ma non era deserta.

in giardino, seduto, presso la vetriata semiaperta, un uomo tremava
convulsamente e guardava smarrito il cielo con occhi lagrimosi.

a pochi passi da lui, nella sala, giaceva una giovinetta svenuta.

ad una finestra del secondo piano si vedeva del fumo e una massa bruna.

aveva forme di donna.

quella.... donna fumava tranquillamente la sua _cigarette_.

                             . . . . . . .

tutto ciò è orribilmente immorale — ma noi saremmo molto lieti,
se, in tutti i casi in cui i genitori vendono le loro figlie.... la
paura della fame fosse, da una parte, l’incentivo al delitto.... e
dall’altra, vi fosse la passione vera.

ma, come sa chi ha viaggiato attraverso questo gran mondezzajo di carne
umana — in genere, non si vende che per ingordigia o per assicurarsi la
poltronaggine. — quel lavoro costa tanta fatica e rende così poco; e i
bisogni sono tanti! —

vi sono poi le vendite legali, ossia per contratto.... di nozze —
ma quelle sono vendite sacre.... e la moralità pubblica, che vede
_rispettate_ le convenienze sociali, s’inchina.... «mah! là.... col
matrimonio si fa la famiglia!» si è venduto.... è vero — in quella
casa potranno esservi torture, lagrime, odj, mostruosità, ribellioni,
tradimenti, crimini.... ma sulla casa sta scritto: — _famiglia_. — e ci
dite poco voi?!

dopo tutto, consoliamoci, pensando che nè la morale, nè i romanzi non
impediranno mai a nessuno di sentirsi il capriccio di comperare. e
quando uno compera, trova sempre chi vende. e guaj se l’_industria_ e
il _commercio_ rovinassero! povero mondo.... allora!

                             . . . . . . .

la fiducia espressa da costanza nel ravvedimento del marito sarà parsa
più che arrischiata. che essendo perfettamente onesta, ella non potesse
credere alla serietà di quel deviamento, sta bene — ma che avesse
a promettersi il ritorno del colpevole emendato, ecco quello di cui
sarebbe difficile capacitarsi, quando non si pensasse che la gente tre
volte buona è sempre.... maravigliosa.

una moglie buona, soltanto due volte, doveva piuttosto temere che,
preso il volo e il gusto alla vita indipendente, non avesse, secondo
ogni probabilità, a preferire il cambiare d’oggetti al ritornare sotto
il tetto conjugale.

ebbene, invece, le parole di costanza furono profetiche.

v’è una chimica anche in amore e, guai se gli elementi non hanno
proprietà che possano combinarsi. pensate alle migliaja di matrimonj
fatti a furor di cervelli, e.... sciolti l’indomani o quasi, con egual
furore — o peggio che sciolti.

la mente ricorre, involontariamente, a certe esaltazioni al trono fatte
a furor di popolo in.... amore — coll’immediato correttivo di quattro
pugnalate, visto che l’esaltato di jeri era d’ostacolo alla nuova
esaltazione del domani.

eppure il furor di jeri era sincero! almeno....

ma, veniamo ad oreste, il quale, quando scrisse quella bella lettera
al suocero, avrebbe dato certamente del pazzo a chi gli avesse detto
che egli era vittima di null’altro che d’una illusione prodotta da una
straordinaria effervescenza del sangue, e che ne sarebbe presto stato
persuaso da sè stesso.

non bastava che il fuoco acceso fosse furioso — eran necessarj anche
gli alimenti per mantenerne la violenza — e, invece, difettarono,
mentre sopravennero in copia materie, le quali non potevan che
spegnerlo.

la convivenza di quel tre esseri era un assurdo. se soranzi non lo
sentì _prima_, lo sentì _dopo_.

noi possiamo valerci di qualunque mezzo per arrivare al possesso d’una
donna.... purchè quel mezzo resti poscia invisibile. ora, maddalena
sarebbe sempre presente!.... maddalena, che non avendo più bisogno
di fingere nè con l’uno nè coll’altra, si esprimeva col suo cinismo
abituale. ma questo era intollerabile, oltrechè disonorevole pel suo
stesso sentimento — questo sfigurava persino la silvia, la quale non
ci aveva colpa, ma non poteva impedire che l’aureola infernale, da cui,
agli occhi di soranzi, appariva cinta la testa di maddalena, lasciasse
cadere su di lei una luce uggiosa, a dir poco.

un altro acerrimo nemico di quell’amore era il valore intrinseco di
oreste, di fronte al non valore di silvia. oreste vide subito che
quella fanciulla era niente altro che bella. forse per l’estrema
giovinezza, o per l’insufficiente educazione, o per l’ignoranza della
vita — come essere sociale era zero. tutto quello ch’essa poteva fare
per lui, pel suo amore, era.... abbracciarlo. era molto, ma troppo poco
per un uomo del carattere, dell’educazione e dell’età di soranzi.

bella bambina.... ma bambina.

si poteva educarla — ma corrisponderebbe poi alle cure? — la educherò
io, — si disse per un momento, ma ne comprese tosto l’impossibilità.

forzato a tener celata al mondo la sua conquista, come educare....
quando l’educazione vera sta nel viaggiare attraverso la vita degli
altri?

come educare.... quando quella madre distruggerebbe sempre l’effetto
delle sue serie ed oneste parole?

ed egli continuerebbe dunque a vivere così, — per finire fra quelle due
donne, spregiato e spregevole a’ suoi stessi occhi?

a peggiorare ancora la situazione s’aggiunse, dopo un mese, il timore
per oreste che l’amore di silvia non fosse che una fiamma prodotta
dall’età e dall’occasione.... e per conseguenza il pensiero che
qualunque altro uomo «presentabile» messole al fianco dalla madre le
avrebbe fatto la medesima impressione. in ciò non s’ingannava, come si
è potuto agevolmente indovinare.

l’animo di lei, infatti, non aveva alcuna di quelle manifestazioni
dinotanti la miracolosa metamorfosi, che è la prima opera del primo
amore.

un incidente imprevedibile venne poi a dare l’ultimo colpo all’affetto
già incertissimo di oreste e a fargli prendere la risoluzione di
troncare per sempre ogni rapporto con quelle due donne. un giorno,
maddalena, per cui la temperanza non era forse la virtù principale....
passati oltre il solito certi limiti, già tutt’altro che limitati, non
sapendo più bene quello che si dicesse, mise fuori dei progetti e si
permise delle sollecitazioni, che fecero balenare alla mente di oreste
il sospetto che egli fosse stato la vittima della congiura di due
furbe matricolate.... s’ingannava.... ma il sospetto v’era — e siccome,
quanto più un sospetto è irragionevole, tanto più facilmente diventa
in breve una certezza, da cui non si riesce a liberarsi, egli fuggì da
quella casa, che da tal momento diventava un inferno.

una mattina non lo trovarono più. aveva lasciato un biglietto, in cui
diceva che i suoi affari rendevano necessaria per alcuni giorni la sua
presenza in città — intanto non si movessero dalla villa....

— ha fatto bene — disse maddalena — questo terzetto cominciava ad
annoiarmi. un po’ d’intermezzo non fa mai male. —

otto giorni dopo, quando lor pareva che l’intermezzo si prolungasse di
soverchio, giunse alla villa un vecchio signore di venerando aspetto,
il quale chiese di parlare colla signora maddalena, da solo a sola.

quando ella sentì dal suocero di soranzi — chè era lui — che bisognava
rinunciare a rivedere oreste, per le tali e tali ragioni, montò su
tutte le furie. un altro individuo avrebbe preso il suo cappello
e battuto in ritirata, per paura di qualche brutto servizio. ma il
suocero era tetragono e troppo interessato, d’altronde, al miglior
scioglimento di quella commedia, per lasciarsi intimorire. alla prima
sosta che maddalena fece per prender fiato, disse con flemma due
paroline, che le tolsero la voglia di continuare sul medesimo tuono,
e, quando la vide più trattabile, seppe farle comprendere che il
miglior partito — anche perchè il più utile — era per lei quello di
rassegnarsi.... sotto date condizioni.

maddalena, vedendo che non v’erano più speranze, pensò solo a far
pagar cara la sua _rassegnazione_ — e crediamo che soranzi abbia dovuto
ricordarsene per un bel pezzo!

                             . . . . . . .

dopo, la madre si trovò sulle braccia la figlia abbandonata, alla quale
bisognava pur rivelar tutto.

come fare? la ragazza era ancora nel primo sogno d’amore, e il
destarla, per sorpresa, poteva essere pericoloso. ora, maddalena, che
aveva fatto il primo passo nella via della speculazione — e a lei era
costato pochissimo anche quello — non voleva, per niun conto, che il
dolore avesse, non che ad avvizzirne, pur a sfiorarne la bellezza.

non v’era che un mezzo solo — rendere ridicolo e odioso soranzi agli
occhi di silvia — e se ne valse, e si può agevolmente imaginare s’ella
trovasse le parole acconce.

contemporaneamente — per non distruggere, senza edificare — la erudiva
nella scienza della vita, nella _sua_ scienza, e con tale accanimento,
che l’anima della povera fanciulla, in breve, non ebbe più alcun
pudore.... e cominciò a sogghignare, come sua madre.

se soranzi, per caso, fosse ritornato, a tanto mutamento avrebbe
creduto di sognare o d’aver sognato prima.

il guasto era talmente profondo, che quando maddalena le rivelò che
soranzi era ammogliato, esclamò: — tanto meglio, così sarò più libera!
— e quando, a certi sintomi, essendosi compreso che madre natura
non s’era data alcun pensiero delle convenienze e aveva fatto il suo
dovere, nacque la discussione se fosse da preferirsi l’_arrischiare_
o il _sopprimere_.... si decise di comune accordo che, tutto ben
considerato, era meglio....

fortunatamente la natura medesima parve preoccuparsi della questione di
moralità, e ribellandosi.... a sè stessa.... dimostrò l’inutilità, pur
di tentar un delitto che avrebbe potuto costar molto caro agli stessi
rei!

fuggiamo, fuggiamo da queste madri.... per ridere, che davvero
farebbero piangere, se gli occhi, troppo abituati allo spettacolo
di una folla di vergini che, in un batter di ciglio, qualunque sia
l’educazione ricevuta, diventan cortigiane.... potessero ancor sentirsi
offesi.

                             . . . . . . .

agitiamo l’incensiere, purifichiamo, profumiamo.

era scorso un mese all’incirca dal giorno in cui il suocero, compiuta
la sua missione, era tornato presso la figlia, in campagna.

una sera, verso le undici, soranzi stava scrivendo al suocero. non
aveva ancor avuto il coraggio di scrivere a costanza, ma, all’indirizzo
del primo erano già partite trenta lettere, che finivano tutte colle
parole «lavoro e spero».

la penna aveva vergate, per la trentunesima volta, quelle parole,
e v’aggiungeva queste altre «comincio a star male,» quando l’uscio
s’aperse e una bianca visione apparve sulla soglia.... soranzi,
al lieve rumore, alzò lo sguardo e trasalì di gioja.... ma non si
levò....; attendeva tremante la prima parola per sapere se gli era
concesso gettarsi a’ suoi piedi per adorarla.

ella mosse verso lui lentamente — e non tremava meno.

— è l’ora del tè.... — balbettò, quando gli fu vicina, con un filo di
voce. era l’emozione del perdono che ella accordava.

soranzi non potè proferir accento, tanto la sentì grande.

s’alzò — ella gli porse la mano, e, silenziosi ambedue, uscirono.... e
s’avviarono verso una nota portiera.

— come....? — mormorò soranzi fremente di voluttà.

— il tè è servito qui.... stasera. —

ella rimosse la portiera ed entrarono.

le finestre erano aperte; dal giardino venivano onde d’effluvj.

lontan lontano, gemeva una romanza.

— che aria pura.... sana.... _questa!_ — esclamò soranzi, giungendo le
mani.

— respiriamola sempre?....

— oh! sempre.... —

assicurano che non si possa dire: «nè mai nè sempre,» ma soranzi potè
sempre dire di non essersi illuso quella sera.

ci hanno riferito che costanza, qualche mese dopo, benedisse quella
momentanea sospensione di vita conjugale, perchè, quando fu ripresa, si
potè ottener quello che prima s’era aspettato tanti anni invano.... il
nonno lo chiamò il figlio della riconciliazione.

se c’è qualche matrimonio infruttifero e se l’esperienza invoglia....

ma, se i mariti si rassegneranno, non crediamo che le mogli avranno il
coraggio di ripeterla. è un’esperienza troppo fisico-chimica.




la figlia di sua madre.

_storia semplice._


i.

madd. oh! ecco qui il nostro caro signor ragioniere. come va, eh? va
bene?

rag. (_che, sia detto di passaggio, è molto invecchiato_) bene....
grazie.

madd. proprio l’uomo della precisione.... scommetto che, colla solita
puntualità, ella mi porta gli interessi del semestre.

rag. appunto.... anzi, come era mio dovere, io sono già venuto il due
luglio.... ma loro erano in campagna....

madd. ah! sicuro.... eravamo proprio in campagna.... cosa vuole.... la
mia silvia, in aprile, si sentiva poco bene.... sa! benedette ragazze,
viene quel tal tempo nella vita....

silvia (_arrossendo, con fatica_). mamma....

madd. eh! che cosa c’è di male!?

rag. e dove sono andate.... se è lecito?

madd. oh!.... abbiamo girato....

rag. e adesso sta bene la signora silvia?

madd. adesso sta benissimo.... ma, perchè la tratta da signora.... ella
è sempre il suo tutore.... e per lei, la silvia deve essere sempre una
bambina.... è vero che ella è un tutore che fa il prezioso....; non la
si vede mai!

rag. cosa vuole.... gli affari!.... creda, un minuto che è un minuto
non l’ho mai a mia disposizione. che bella giovane s’è fatta sta
silvia! quasi quasi.... si può prepararle la schirpa.... perchè da un
momento all’altro, già....

madd. ah! per carità.... non me ne parli! quando io penso che verrà
quel giorno.... (_sospira due volte_)

rag. capisco che alla mamma possa rincrescere.... ma già.... è
il destino delle ragazze.... e pare che la mamma non abbia fatto
diversamente, eh! eh! eh!

madd. senta.... non dico: pur troppo — perchè, altrimenti, non avrei la
mia silvia, ma, del resto....

rag. via, non stia a dir male del matrimonio che, dopo tutto....

madd. io dir male del matrimonio a mia figlia....? tutt’altro.... tanto
è vero che.... ma acqua in bocca pel momento.

rag. come.... come.... c’è qualche novità?

madd. c’è.... e non c’è.... a dir il vero, non sappiamo nemmen noi che
cosa pensare. ma.... aspetti che ora mi vien un’idea.... ma sicuro!
ella è proprio arrivato a proposito per rendermi un grande favore....
se vuole....

rag. dica, dica.

madd. anzi, ella deve volere, perchè essendo tutore, ne ha, dirò così,
un obbligo sacro di coscienza.... ma veniamo al concreto.... sappia
adunque che c’è un giovinetto.... guardi guardi la silvia come diventa
rossa.... come scappa!.... ah! ah!

rag. non scapperà sempre!

madd. dunque, c’è un giovinotto che abbiamo conosciuto giorni sono in
_wagon_, tornando dalla campagna. s’è scambiato qualche parola.... ma
sa.... proprio indifferente, come si usa fra viaggiatori. — ebbene....
cosa vuole! pare che la silvia gli abbia fatto colpo.... da quel giorno
si è messo a passeggiare per questa via, guardando sempre le nostre
finestre.... e non siamo mai uscite una volta, senza incontrarlo.
per alcuni giorni, si è limitato a salutarci — fra parentesi, saluta
molto bene — dopo, ha domandato alla portinaia che gente siamo.... ed,
infine, jeri ha lasciato il suo biglietto di visita, con una riga, in
cui ci prega di fargli l’onore di riceverlo stasera.... cosa ne dice?

rag. che persona è?

madd. il giovine è di bell’aspetto.... veste signorilmente, e pare una
persona educatissima.... ma lei, signor ragioniere, sa che le apparenze
ingannano, ed il favore che io vorrei da lei, sarebbe precisamente
questo.... che mi sapesse dire, cioè, che cosa vi sia di solido sotto
tali apparenze.... quindi come stiamo a denari.... a carattere.... e a
famiglia.... ah! la famiglia, sopratutto....

rag. eh! s’intende....

madd. e poi già lei è un uomo di polso, e non occorre dirle cosa ci
vuole.

rag. e il suo giovinotto si chiama?

madd. si chiama augusto livi, e abita in casa farinelli.

rag. basta così.... lasci fare a me. ella intanto lo interroghi. noi,
poi, facendo il confronto di quanto avrò saputo io con quanto avrà
detto lui, vedremo se il giovine è sincero....

madd. benissimo.... e quando crede di potermi favorire?

rag. oh! dio.... fra un pajo di giorni. se la famiglia è assolutamente
buona, si fa prestissimo a saperlo. gli è quando le informazioni sono
vaghe, incerte.... che comincia il difficile....

madd. speriamo sia buona!

rag. speriamo....; a rivederci.

madd. a rivederci.... silvia....! adesso puoi venire.... saluta il
signor ragioniere.

rag. mille augurii, cara silvietta.

madd. oh! è un po’ troppo presto ancora.

rag. eh! il cuore mi predice bene. nuovamente.

madd. nuovamente — e grazie intanto. quando tornerà, poi, se avrà del
buono.... ne beveremo una bottiglia.... mah!

rag. ne beveremo due.

ne bevettero tre!


ii.

le informazioni non possono essere migliori.... e, quel che è proprio
consolante, al cuore d’una madre.... d’una sposa, consonano con tutto
quanto augusto ha detto dell’esser suo e della propria famiglia.

— egli è figlio unico di madre vedova, colla quale vive. sono venuti
dalla città di x.... in questa, da soli tre anni, dopo la morte del
rispettivo padre e marito. la sostanza è di quattrocentomila lire e
vi sono molte speranze tutt’altro che incerte. madre e figlio vivono
come due colombi e non hanno relazioni di sorta, all’infuori del loro
banchiere e del padrone di casa. solo, di tanto in tanto, arriva dalla
provincia qualche parente per vederli e tosto ripartire.

il giovine, benchè ricco, non ama l’ozio.... è impiegato, come
dilettante di commercio, presso il suo banchiere.... e un uomo occupato
è sempre miglior marito d’un altro che fa il vagabondo.

insomma, è un partito d’oro.

nulla di più onesto, poi, di più leale, di più ingenuo di augusto.

— ah! è il mio ideale.... — esclama maddalena, a queste ultime parole
— perchè, per la mia silvia, abbiamo appunto bisogno di un giovine
onesto, leale e sopratutto ingenuo! —

quel caro signor ragioniere non trova che dell’entusiasmo materno,
nel tuono con cui maddalena proferisce tal frase e nello sguardo che
l’accompagna rivolto alla figlia.

noi possiamo aggiungere che augusto, a ventitrè anni, ne sapeva di
questo mondo, quanto voi ne sapete di quell’altro. a mantenerlo in tale
ignoranza, aveva contribuito massimamente sua madre che, paurosa di
tutto, gelosa di tutti, se l’era sempre tenuto cucito alla gonnella.
gli aveva fatto dare una buona educazione, ma in casa — e non gli aveva
mai permesso un’amicizia.

egli era già il di lei cavaliere, vivente il marito — figurarsi poi,
dopo. parevano madre e figlio.... siamesi.

questo metodo d’allevamento sarà buono.... ma pei bachi.

d’una delicatezza femminea, nel modo di vivere, di vestire,
d’esprimersi.... preferiva i canditi al _beef-steak_, le foggie
suggerite dalla caricatura alle comode indicate dal buon senso, non
parlava, pispissava sulla _punta_ delle labbra.... e le sue dita
parevano sempre occupate in lavori al _crochet_.

d’una sensibilità tanto spinta che era morbosa; alla vista del
più indifferente maluccio, al racconto della più lieve disgrazia,
minacciava deliquio.

aveva molte idee umanitarie, fra cui due principali, anzi maniache:
— il ricovero pei cavalli invalidi — e il _paletôt_ pei cani
nell’inverno.

pareva non si fosse mai accorto che ci fossero donne a questo mondo.

la prima volta che se ne accorse fu quando, nel ritornare in città,
dopo aver fatto visita ad uno zio convalescente, si trovò vicino a
silvia, in _wagon_ — e al buon ragazzo non venne altra idea che quella
di sposarla, come se tutte le donne si potessero sposare.

cioè, un ladro può sposare una ladra, un ladro può sposare il suo
femminile.... ma non incrociamo san luigi con messalina.... e via
discorrendo, come diceva quel tale.

la madre di augusto disse subito di sì.

poichè a quel benedetto sangue non si era potuto impedire di bollire,
meglio il matrimonio che esporre, con un divieto, il figlio alle tristi
influenze della vita mondana.

semplice, oca ella stessa, non capì niente nè di maddalena nè della
figlia, anzi, silvia le sembrò un capolavoro di ingenuità!

avvicinandosi il giorno delle nozze, silvia disse a maddalena:

— ma di’ un po’, mamma.... vuoi dirgli proprio _nulla_?

— di che cosa?

— ma sai bene, _siamo state in campagna_.

— oh! oh! non ci pensare tu adesso a queste cose.... provvederemo
a suo tempo. è tanto ingenuo che sarebbe un vero peccato togliergli
un’illusione.... perchè i bambini credono al _bambino_? perchè non
sanno che non c’è. e non sono felicissimi egualmente? —

si fecero le nozze.... e maddalena volle accompagnare la figlia nel
viaggio, perchè il dolore del distacco le era intollerabile.

egli bevette il dolore, bevette molto a pranzo — _uno_ dei
provvedimenti, questo — e bevette....

e infinito è il numero dei.... bevitori. ed è col far bere che tante
donne.... mangiano.


iii.

augusto è il più felice dei mariti. quando egli dice: «mia moglie,»
gli si inumidiscono gli occhi, — egli canta incessantemente le lodi di
lei...., pare che al mondo vi sia una moglie unica, la sua.... insomma,
è una vera noja.

la prima donna ch’egli ha potuto avvicinare, l’ha amata, l’ha avuta —
egli ha tutte le illusioni — ecco perchè è felice.

quanto a silvia, un po’ per indole, un po’ a cagione del noto
assaggio, proclive al genere forte, sulle prime s’è divertita con
quell’uomo-donna.... ma se n’è ben presto infastidita.

quando sono sul declinare, le donne s’interessano per gli uomini
ingenui — ma nell’età in cui esse sono ancora angeli, non amano che i
demoni.

fra silvia e sua madre si fanno le più grasse risate alle sublimi
bambinate che l’amore inspira al povero fanciullo — si coprono di
ludibrio le sue _poesie_....

quand’egli è in casa, si frenano a stento gli sbadigli, ma si finge
tuttavia di amarlo, di adorarlo, lo si chiama coi più teneri nomi, non
esclusi i francesi: _petit chat — chou — bibi_ e _titi_.... il che per
lui è miele profumato.

siccome silvia dice che un uomo come lui, il quale _batte_ il
commercio, deve avere delle relazioni, deve ricevere.... egli si tira
in casa i compagni di studio e i loro amici. silvia, dal canto suo,
invita le signore mantovani, i loro congiunti e le loro conoscenze.
ecco fatta la vera famiglia-società.

in breve tempo, la casa è un porto di mare, in cui si viene e si va,
in cui ognuno fa il piacer suo. si balla tutte le sere e qualche volta
anche di giorno, si gioca, si fanno dei graziosi proverbi misti, nei
quali i versi non sono martelliani e la prosa è scorrevolissima.

augusto, il semplice, si diverte come un matto a tutto quello che
vede e sente o che sua moglie gli racconta. — egli si diverte tanto
più schiettamente, perchè silvia, svelando le magagne o schernendo il
ridicolo degli altri, non trascura di parlare de’ suoi principj, del
suo buon senso. — così giovane, ella è d’una austerità tale — dice lei
— che guaj se alcuno....! —

la madre di augusto, a poco a poco, ha aperto gli occhi; impensierita
a tanto sperpero, scandalezzata a quella folle esistenza, vorrebbe coi
consigli e coi sermoni.... ristaurare l’ordine, le modeste abitudini,
ecc., ma, fiato gettato.... augusto, che non s’è mai divertito, un’ora
sola, in vita sua, prima del matrimonio, ci piglia troppo gusto alle
attuali pazzie, per far buon viso alle prediche, che egli trova anche
ingiustissime, perchè «alla fin fine, non si fa niente di male.»

sua madre non vuol darsi per vinta, vuol perseverare nel
moralizzare.... ed egli cessa di vedere sua madre.

egli è diventato figlio di sua moglie.

dopo otto mesi di matrimonio, silvia non ha ancor forato il contratto
nuziale, ma, penetrata nei misteri della vita delle amiche, comincia a
guardar sul pomo....

talvolta, assorta nella contemplazione dei colori di quelle mele,
fantastica anche sui varj sapori.

è certo che una giusta maturanza sarebbe la preferibile. — ma, una
maturanza anche un po’ passata ha pure i suoi pregi.... ai quali,
una curiosità non ancor soddisfatta, dà un valore maggior del
reale. — e la frutta che, a rigore, sarebbe acerbetta.... è forse da
disprezzarsi?.... è così stuzzicante!

— sì, tutto va bene, ma si arrischia troppo. c’è la posizione di
mezzo! andiamo avanti così.... prima di decidere, bisogna rifletter
seriamente. —

i due migliori amici di augusto — gli altri ne hanno uno, egli due, ne
ha di migliori! — sono suoi compagni di studio, orlando e diodato, e
la loro amicizia è diventata un’abnegazione, un completo sacrificio,
dacchè egli li ha introdotti presso sua moglie.

i due migliori sanno più degli altri far ridere la vaga silvia, che,
pertanto, li preferisce. ambedue la corteggiano, ma siccome, quando c’è
l’uno, c’è anche l’altro, così, a guisa d’una pariglia, corrono sempre
insieme; nessuno può oltrepassar l’altro.... ma, uniti, non possono
arrivare, e questo fa sì che si conservano sempre amici.

viene la stagione dei bagni, e diodato può partire con augusto, colla
signora e con altri. — orlando, invece, trattenuto dall’impiego, non
può muoversi. orlando capisce tanto l’importanza di quelle bagnature
che lavora sott’acqua per far trattenere diodato e accordare a lui,
orlando, il permesso di partire. ma diodato, che è buon intenditore, fa
l’ammalato, per cui è forza lasciar andar lui pel primo.

orlando si rassegna a malincuore, e spera nella virtù di silvia.

speranza fallace.... due settimane dopo un bollettino sanitario privato
gli porta una cruda notizia....

v’è stato un naufragio....; eppure il cielo era sereno, non soffiava
vento ed il mare era calmissimo.

il bollettino cominciava così:

«augusto è imperatore....»


iv.

— non mi resta che soppiantarlo, al ritorno — sospira orlando.

ma, al ritorno, non gli resta che pulirsi la bocca. silvia è una virtù
di macigno.

è diventata una donna seria, sdegna quasi ridere e, quando c’è diodato,
sdegna anche parlare.

orlando, che non sa se capisca troppo.... oppure niente affatto, dice a
silvia:

— diodato l’ha forse offesa qualche volta.... per caso?

— no, perchè?

— ma, non gli parla mai....

— le dirò...., alle volte ha uno spirito che per gli orecchi di una
signora non è il più gradito.

— vedo — fa orlando tutt’altro che persuaso.

un altro giorno, tenta far parlare diodato con delle mezze allusioni
maliziose.

— spiegati meglio — dice quello — perchè, davvero, io non capisco dove
vuoi andare a finire.

— volevo farti capire che so una cosa, che con tutta la nostra
amicizia, tu non mi dici.... tu sei l’amante della signora silvia.

— io? — fa diodato cadendo dalle nuvole.

— almeno tutti lo credono.

— sono il suo amante quanto.... te.... ma dico.... se tu mi tasti,
così, per sapere se io posso essere tuo rivale.... non darti alcun
pensiero di me.... avanti, avanti pure. libero è il campo.... almeno io
lo credo. —

una sera, augusto dice ad orlando:

— vuoi venire ad accompagnarmi domani qui fuori qualche miglio? vado a
vedere un villino che m’hanno proposto. doveva venire anche silvia, ma
si sente poco bene e non vorrei che.... —

orlando guarda silvia, e gli pare che stia meglio di lui, che sta
benissimo.

— viene forse anche diodato? — domanda.

— gliel’ho detto, ma non può.

— mi rincresce che vai solo.... perchè, neppur io posso muovermi.

— ho capito! —

orlando, si dice che stavolta ha scoperto decisamente il mistero.... e
l’indifferenza di silvia e di diodato gli pare ancor più studiata del
solito.

l’indomani mattina, orlando va a casa di diodato, il quale non mostra
alcun piacere per tale visita.

— vieni con me a far una bella passeggiata?

— no, grazie, ho un impegno.

— vedo.... allora andrò solo.

— buon divertimento.

— altrettanto. —

orlando va a casa di silvia. è mezzogiorno.

silvia sta per uscire, e mal dissimula la noja che prova nel vedere
quel signore.

— scusi — comincia orlando, giojoso in cuore perchè certissimo d’essere
giunto in tempo per impedire un abboccamento — scusi, non avrebbero
trovato per caso il mio portafogli?

— no....

— oh! diavolo.... credevo proprio d’averlo smarrito qui jeri sera.

— mi rincresce.

— anche a me.... non tanto pel denaro, sa bene.... quanto perchè è un
regalo. — esce?

— sì....

— e dove va di bello, se è lecito?

— vado da.... mia madre.

— oh! bene.... se mi permette, la accompagnerò.... è appunto qualche
tempo che non ho il piacere di vederla. —

se orlando sapesse cosa vuol dire l’occhiata che gli dà silvia!

— mi rincresce — risponde la signora — che ella si incomodi, tanto più
che io farò un giro lungo.... devo prendere dei guanti.... e qualche
cos’altro.

— niente di meglio.... io sono appunto disoccupato.... farò il giro
anch’io e compereremo insieme....

— oh! dio.... che....

— vuol dire che nojoso?...

— no.... volevo dire che dolore a questa gamba.... l’aveva anche jeri,
ma credeva se ne fosse andato.... era proprio destino che oggi non
dovessi uscire....

— allora — continua spietatamente orlando — rimarrò a tenerle
compagnia. —

silvia gli lancia un’altra occhiata velenosa, dicendo, non senza un
lieve tremito:

— le sono molto obbligata.... ma la prevengo che si annojerà assai con
me, perchè oggi è una cattiva giornata.

— povera donna....

— permette che legga?

— ma s’imagini.... anzi.... leggerò anch’io.

— quest’uomo vuol farmi morire! — pensa silvia, la quale si mette a
leggere e non dice più una parola.

egli fa altrettanto. ha deciso di non muoversi, finchè non venga
qualche visita, a cui dirà in faccia a silvia che la signora per quel
giorno non può uscire.

passa circa un’ora.

scampanellata.

silvia trasalisce suo malgrado. orlando fiuta.

compare la cameriera, che dice con sorriso misterioso:

— c’è qui quella signora....!

— quale?.... ah! vedo.... pregala di accomodarsi nel mio gabinetto....
tu va pure in chiesa, se vuoi.... signor orlando, permette che mi
trattenga un momento con quella signora?....

— anzi.... io la aspetterò.

— grazie — e silvia esce esasperata, invocando un fulmine
sull’indiscreto.

orlando, rimasto solo, non credendo niente affatto che sia venuta una
signora, vuol sapere chi è. — ce ne fosse un altro? — pensa. apre pian
piano l’uscio che mette in anticamera e tende l’orecchio.

non s’ingannava, si ode un dialogo bissessuale concitato dal gabinetto,
ma non si può capire. allora, in punta di piedi, va presso quell’uscio
e origlia.

felice orlando! finalmente viene a sapere chi sia orlando.

la voce di silvia (_fremente_) — è un’ora che è qui quell’imbecille!
se tu sapessi quel che ho fatto per levarmelo da’ piedi.... ma non c’è
stato verso. pare inchiodato. si direbbe quasi ch’egli sappia qualche
cosa.

la voce di diodato, la quale solletica gradevolmente il nostro orlando.
— impossibile.

silv. mi rincresce per te...., povero angelo!

diod. una giornata così propizia.... e perderla!

silv. cosa vuoi farci.... abbi pazienza.... ci vedremo domani alle tre.

diod. bene.... ricordati di prendere una carrozza.... l’altro giorno,
sei stata troppo imprudente.

silv. è vero.... non lo farò più.

diod. addio.... cara.

silv. ad.... dio.... no, no.... va.... domani.

diod. dove mi spingi?

silv. ti faccio scendere per la scaletta. non si sa mai.... —

                             . . . . . . .

quando silvia rientra nella sala, trova orlando che sonnecchia.

— buona notte.... — gli grida tutta gaja.

— oh! scusi!.... che ora è?

— per bacco.... è tardi.... devo per forza levarle il disturbo....

— cosa dice mai....

— al piacere di rivederla.

— aggiunga: presto....

                             . . . . . . .

— troppo compita! —

                             . . . . . . .

tornando a casa, augusto trova dal portinajo questo biglietto.

      «caro amico,

  «stasera alle dieci, ti aspetto al solito caffè, devo chiederti un
  gran favore.

                                              «tuo affezionatissimo
                                                         «orlando.»

la sera alle dieci.

augusto, entrando nel caffè. — non potevi venire a casa mia a chiedermi
il gran favore?

orl. gli è perchè, invece di chiederlo.... devo.... un momento....,
prima è necessario che tu stesso mi consigli cosa devo fare.... perchè
io non voglio rimorsi.

aug. (_ridendo_) rimorsi?

orl. senti.... dimmi un po’.... se tu avessi un carissimo amico
innamorato alla follìa di una donna e degno di essere da lei riamato,
e venissi a scoprire che mentre ella finge di amar lui, ne ama un
altro.... tu che cosa faresti, quando tu fossi il solo a possedere tale
secreto?....

aug. (_pensoso ma senza sospetto_) scusa.... si tratta di qualche
nostro amico?

orl. supponi....

aug. non ti domando nemmeno chi è.... perchè sono cose delicate....
dimmi piuttosto: quella donna è sua moglie?....

orl. ma.... questo non importa, quando si ama, o moglie o no....

aug. (_serio_) è vero. ebbene, in tal caso.... io, da vero amico,
direi a quel marito.... guarda che tua moglie t’inganna.... ma gliene
darei, in pari tempo, la prova. altrimenti sarebbe inutile e sciocco il
parlare.

orl. ti ringrazio del consiglio e lo seguirò. era il favore che
m’occorreva. —


v.

augusto, tornando a casa, pensa alle parole di orlando:

— chi sa che razza di donna è.... perchè se egli è degno del suo
amore, e invece...., allora bisogna dire.... eh! è una disgrazia come
un’altra. basta.... chi ci ha da fare, vi pensi.... e noi andiamo
subito a casa...., se no, la silvia non può prender sonno.... cara
silvia.... —

la cara silvia, invece, caso straordinario, dorme digià.... o finge
dormire.

egli si corica con tutti i riguardi per non svegliarla — poi, sta
un’ora a contemplarla amorosamente, mormorando: — come è bella! chi
sa qual sogno poetico ella gode in questo momento. come sorride! mi
ami....? mi amerai sempre? non farai come quelle altre che fingono
d’amare.... e poi....? no.... tu non puoi ingannare chi è degno
del tuo amore.... infatti.... se si tradisce chi merita amore....
che cosa si farà ad un marito che si rende odioso.... ad un marito
scellerato....? —

                             . . . . . . .

l’indomani, orlando, augusto e diodato lavorano alla banca. verso le
due pomeridiane, diodato, con un pretesto qualunque, se ne va.

orlando si avvicina lentamente ad augusto e gli dice:

— e tu non vai?

— dove?

— non segui diodato?

— perchè?

— hai presente quello che t’ho detto ieri sera....?

— sì.

— ebbene, questo tradimento mi fa tanto orrore che io non posso tacere.

— e tu parla....

— ma dunque, non capisci ancora....?

— capire.... che cosa? — il povero ragazzo si fa smorto e guarda
l’amico con occhi smarriti.

— hai del coraggio.... coraggio morale?

— credo....

— ebbene, va all’abitazione di diodato, appóstati in modo da non essere
veduto da alcuno....; alle ore tre arriverà una carrozza.... ne uscirà
una donna....

— e quella donna....? — balbetta augusto, con voce fioca.

— va, non perder tempo.... t’ho già detto troppo. —


alle tre, una carrozza si fermava davanti all’abitazione di diodato.
pochi minuti dopo, la gente s’affollava alla porta di quella casa
intorno al cadavere d’un giovine signore, che s’era precipitato da una
finestra, al terzo piano.

caso stranissimo, inesplicabile — pel momento — quell’appartamento
era vuoto, la sala era tutta sossopra, sedie rovesciate, porcellane
infrante — si vedevano delle gocce di sangue sul tappeto, l’uscio della
sola camera che avesse la finestra aperta, sulla via, era chiuso e la
chiave non si trovava. nessun inquilino aveva udito niente — e la casa
non aveva portinajo.


il giorno susseguente, un giovine si presentava al questore per fare
una deposizione importante.

era diodato e aveva una mano fasciata.

«egli aveva dovuto usare della forza e rinchiudere quell’energumeno in
una camera per salvare una povera donna.»


quando maddalena seppe da silvia quel che era avvenuto, esclamò:

— tu sei una stupida,... e lui.... e lui....! val proprio la pena
d’ammazzarsi per così poco.... per fortuna, gli altri hanno più buon
senso, se no.... povero mondo.... e povere donne! —


le due femmine, messo insieme il bello e il buono, partirono alla
volta di babilonia, per ingrossarvi la «grande armata» delle donne che
ridono.

«una donna è sempre onesta dove arriva per la prima volta.» — era un
aforismo di maddalena. quando poi questa donna sa fare la madre nobile
ed ha con sè una figlia tanto valente....

del resto, noi non ne sappiamo altro.


la misera madre d’augusto perdette la ragione — ma la sua è una pazzia
dolce. sorride sempre e canticchia spesso:

    «bella figlia dell’amore.»

era il motivo favorito di augusto.


giulio e severina, abbandonati gli affari, si sono ritirati in un
villaggio appiè delle alpi.

sembrano due barche di adipe. cosa vuol dire il cuor contento! è
vero che sono molto ricchi. cominciata, sapete come, tale fortuna,
s’ingrossò poi col gioco. satolli, ora, provano che la farina del
diavolo va.... in polenta. sicuro; essi si divertono a far la parte
della provvidenza, nel villaggio. — giulio è fabbriciere, predica
il lavoro, la religione, la morale, e dice sempre: — vedete me e mia
moglie? eravamo due poveri giobbi, ma ora, _col sudore della nostra
fronte_, siamo quel che siamo. imitate, ragazzi miei, imitate, e dio
benedirà i vostri sforzi come ha benedetto i nostri. —


  fine.

_ps._ volevamo lasciarla nella penna, ma è così.... comica, che la
lasceremo, invece, uscire:

_quell_’individuo che aveva cominciato a recitare _quello_ sproloquio
funebre, nel cimitero, sulla tomba di livi, era.... _quell’imbecille_!

a proposito.... se date dell’imbecille a uno che lo merita sul serio,
potete star certi che se ne vendicherà sanguinosamente.




_altri romanzi dello stesso autore:_

un amore a fondo perso. un volume.

evelina o il primo romanzo d’una moglie. un volume.

                                 * * *

passione maledetta. un volume elegante di 470 pagine — edizione brigola.

  salutato, al suo apparire, con entusiasmo, da una parte —
  fischiato, vilipeso, calunniato, dall’altra — questo romanzo ha
  avuto un successo di scandalo, al quale l’autore non mirava certo.

  esprimere passioni, idee, aspirazioni dell’epoca nostra e della
  nostra società, con tutti i colori della realtà — senza palliativi,
  senza menzogne — ecco il suo unico scopo, ch’egli avrebbe
  conseguito, se, come dichiararono i suoi stessi avversarj, la
  _passione maledetta è primissima ed audacissima espressione del
  realismo_.

  l’autore non si difende, _qualunque_ sia stato il sistema
  d’attacco, essendo convinto che, per chi sa leggere, il suo libro
  si difende da sè.

  dichiara solo altamente — ma, soltanto, alla gente di buona fede
  — che, ben lungi dall’essere immorale, contiene molte e preziose
  moralità — e qualche critico _onestissimo_ lo provò ad esuberanza.

  circa la questione poi se la prima giovinezza possa o no leggere
  questo romanzo, l’autore è d’avviso che non debba leggere nè questo
  nè alcun altro romanzo.

  ogni cosa a suo tempo, cominciando dal coltello, che i bambini non
  devono nemmeno toccare.

sì vende in milano dalle librerie brigola — galli e omodei — fratelli
dumolard — presso l’agenzia del giornale _il sole_, e, fuori, dai
principali libraj

                          _al prezzo di l. 4._





nota del trascrittore

ortografia e punteggiatura originali sono state mantenute, correggendo
senza annotazione minimi errori tipografici.





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook madri.... per ridere ***


    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™

project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.

the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.

﻿the project gutenberg ebook of a preface to morals
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: a preface to morals

author: walter lippmann

release date: october 9, 2025 [ebook #77019]

language: english

original publication: new york: the macmillan company, 1929

credits: sean/ib@dp


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook a preface to morals ***





                             walter lippmann


                                   a
                                 preface
                                   to
                                 morals


                          the macmillan company
                          new york      mcmxxix


                            copyright, 1929.
                        by the macmillan company.

                        set up and electrotyped.
                          published may, 1929.

                            _first printing_

        _all rights reserved, including the right of reproduction
                    in whole or in part in any form._


              _printed in the united states of america by_
                 j. j. little and ives company, new york




                                contents


                                 part i

                 the dissolution of the ancestral order

    chapter                                                         page

    i. the problem of unbelief                                         3
         1. whirl is king                                              3
         2. false prophecies                                           5
         3. sorties and retreats                                      10
         4. deep dissolution                                          14

   ii. god in the modern world                                        21
         1. imago dei                                                 21
         2. an indefinite god                                         23
         3. god in more senses than one                               25
         4. the protest of the fundamentalists                        30
         5. in man’s image                                            35

  iii. the loss of certainty                                          37
         1. ways of reading the bible                                 37
         2. modernism: immortality as an example                      40
         3. what modernism leaves out                                 48

   iv. the acids of modernity                                         51
         1. the kingly pattern                                        51
         2. landmarks                                                 56
         3. barren ground                                             61
         4. sophisticated violence                                    63
         5. rulers                                                    65

    v. the breakdown of authority                                     68
         1. god’s government                                          68
         2. the doctrine of the keys                                  71
         3. the logic of toleration                                   74
         4. a working compromise                                      76
         5. the effect of patriotism                                  78
         6. the dissolution of a sovereignty                          82

   vi. lost provinces                                                 84
         1. business                                                  84
         2. the family                                                88
         3. art                                                       94
           a. the disappearance of religious painting                 94
           b. the loss of a heritage                                  96
           c. the artist formerly                                     98
           d. the artist as a prophet                                101
           e. art for art’s sake                                     104
           f. the burden of originality                              106

  vii. the drama of destiny                                          112
         1. the soul in the modern world                             112
         2. the great scenario                                       115
         3. earmarks of truth                                        118
         4. on reconciling religion and science                      121
         5. gospels of science                                       125
         6. the deeper conflict                                      131
         7. theocracy and humanism                                   133


                                 part ii

                       the foundations of humanism

       introduction                                                  143

 viii. golden memories                                               145

   ix. the insight of humanism                                       152
         1. the two approaches to life                               152
         2. freedom and restraint                                    153
         3. the ascetic principle                                    158
         4. oscillation between two principles                       164
         5. the golden mean and its difficulties                     166
         6. the matrix of humanism                                   171
         7. the career of the soul                                   175
         8. the passage into maturity                                183
         9. the function of high religion                            191

    x. high religion and the modern world                            194
         1. popular religion and the great teachers                  194
         2. the aristocratic principle                               197
         3. the peculiarity of the modern situation                  200
         4. the stone which the builders rejected                    203


                                 part iii

                         the genius of modernity

   xi. the cure of souls                                             213
         1. the problem of evil                                      213
         2. superstition and self-consciousness                      217
         3. virtue                                                   221
         4. from clue to practice                                    226

  xii. the business of the great society                             232
         1. the invention of invention                               232
         2. the creative principle in modernity                      235
         3. naive capitalism                                         241
         4. the credo of old-style business                          244
         5. old-style reform and revolution                          247
         6. the diffusion of the acquisitive instinct                252
         7. ideals                                                   257

 xiii. government in the great society                               260
         1. loyalty                                                  260
         2. the evolution of loyalty                                 263
         3. pluralism                                                267
         4. live and let live                                        269
         5. government in the people                                 272
         6. politicians and statesmen                                279

  xiv. love in the great society                                     284
         1. the external control of sexual conduct                   284
         2. birth control                                            288
         3. the logic of birth control                               293
         4. the use of convention                                    299
         5. the new hedonism                                         301
         6. marriage and affinity                                    307
         7. the schooling of desire                                  311

   xv. the moralist in an unbelieving world                          314
         1. the declaration of ideals                                314
         2. the choice of a way                                      320
         3. the religion of the spirit                               326

 appendix: acknowledgments and notes                                 331

 index                                                               339




                             part i [p001]

                 the dissolution of the ancestral order

               _“whirl is king, having driven out zeus.”_
                                                aristophanes.




                       a preface to morals [p003]




chapter i

the problem of unbelief


1. _whirl is king_

among those who no longer believe in the religion of their fathers,
some are proudly defiant, and many are indifferent. but there are also
a few, perhaps an increasing number, who feel that there is a vacancy
in their lives. this inquiry deals with their problem. it is not
intended to disturb the serenity of those who are unshaken in the faith
they hold, and it is not concerned with those who are still exhilarated
by their escape from some stale orthodoxy. it is concerned with those
who are perplexed by the consequences of their own irreligion. it deals
with the problem of unbelief, not as believers are accustomed to deal
with it, in the spirit of men confidently calling the lost sheep back
into the fold, but as unbelievers themselves must, i think, face the
problem if they face it candidly and without presumption.

when such men put their feelings into words they are likely to say
that, having lost their faith, they have lost the certainty that their
lives are significant, and that it matters what they do with their
lives. if they deal with young people they are likely to say that
they know of no compelling reason which certifies the moral code they
adhere to, and that, therefore, their own preferences, when tested by
the ruthless curiosity of their children, seem to have no [p004] sure
foundation of any kind. they are likely to point to the world about
them, and to ask whether the modern man possesses any criterion by
which he can measure the value of his own desires, whether there is any
standard he really believes in which permits him to put a term upon
that pursuit of money, of power, and of excitement which has created
so much of the turmoil and the squalor and the explosiveness of modern
civilization.

these are, perhaps, merely the rationalizations of the modern man’s
discontent. at the heart of it there are likely to be moments of blank
misgiving in which he finds that the civilization of which he is a
part leaves a dusty taste in his mouth. he may be very busy with many
things, but he discovers one day that he is no longer sure they are
worth doing. he has been much preoccupied; but he is no longer sure he
knows why. he has become involved in an elaborate routine of pleasures;
and they do not seem to amuse him very much. he finds it hard to
believe that doing any one thing is better than doing any other thing,
or, in fact, that it is better than doing nothing at all. it occurs
to him that it is a great deal of trouble to live, and that even in
the best of lives the thrills are few and far between. he begins more
or less consciously to seek satisfactions, because he is no longer
satisfied, and all the while he realizes that the pursuit of happiness
was always a most unhappy quest. in the later stages of his woe he not
only loses his appetite, but becomes excessively miserable trying to
recover it. and then, surveying the flux of events and the giddiness
of his own soul, he comes to feel that aristophanes must have been
thinking of him when he declared that “whirl is king, having driven out
zeus.” [p005]


2. _false prophecies_

the modern age has been rich both in prophecies that men would at
last inherit the kingdoms of this world, and in complaints at the
kind of world they inherited. thus petrarch, who was an early victim
of modernity, came to feel that he would “have preferred to be born
in any other period” than his own; he tells us that he sought an
escape by imagining that he lived in some other age. the nineteenth
century, which begat us, was forever blowing the trumpets of freedom
and providing asylums in which its most sensitive children could
take refuge. wordsworth fled from mankind to rejoice in nature.
chateaubriand fled from man to rejoice in savages. byron fled to an
imaginary greece, and william morris to the middle ages. a few tried
an imaginary india. a few an equally imaginary china. many fled to
bohemia, to utopia, to the golden west, and to the latin quarter, and
some, like james thomson, to hell where they were

            gratified to gain
  that positive eternity of pain
  instead of this insufferable inane.

they had all been disappointed by the failure of a great prophecy. the
theme of this prophecy had been that man is a beautiful soul who in the
course of history had somehow become enslaved by

  scepters, tiaras, swords, and chains, and tomes
  of reasoned wrong, glozed on by ignorance,

and they believed with shelley that when “the loathsome mask has
fallen,” man, exempt from awe, worship, degree, the king over himself,
would then be “free from guilt or [p006] pain.” this was the orthodox
liberalism to which men turned when they had lost the religion of their
fathers. but the promises of liberalism have not been fulfilled. we are
living in the midst of that vast dissolution of ancient habits which
the emancipators believed would restore our birthright of happiness. we
know now that they did not see very clearly beyond the evils against
which they were rebelling. it is evident to us that their prophecies
were pleasant fantasies which concealed the greater difficulties that
confront men, when having won the freedom to do what they wish—that
wish, as byron said:

          which ages have not yet subdued
  in man—to have no master save his mood,

they are full of contrary moods and do not know what they wish to do.
we have come to see that huxley was right when he said that “a man’s
worst difficulties begin when he is able to do as he likes.”

the evidences of these greater difficulties lie all about us: in the
brave and brilliant atheists who have defied the methodist god, and
have become very nervous; in the women who have emancipated themselves
from the tyranny of fathers, husbands, and homes, and with the
intermittent but expensive help of a psychoanalyst, are now enduring
liberty as interior decorators; in the young men and women who are
world-weary at twenty-two; in the multitudes who drug themselves with
pleasure; in the crowds enfranchised by the blood of heroes who cannot
be persuaded to take an interest in their destiny; in the millions, at
last free to think without fear of priest or policeman, who have made
the moving pictures and the popular newspapers what they are. [p007]

these are the prisoners who have been released. they ought to be very
happy. they ought to be serene and composed. they are free to make
their own lives. there are no conventions, no tabus, no gods, priests,
princes, fathers, or revelations which they must accept. yet the result
is not so good as they thought it would be. the prison door is wide
open. they stagger out into trackless space under a blinding sun. they
find it nerve-wracking. “my sensibility,” said flaubert, “is sharper
than a razor’s edge; the creaking of a door, the face of a bourgeois,
an absurd statement set my heart to throbbing and completely upset me.”
they must find their own courage for battle and their own consolation
in defeat. they complain, like renan after he had broken with the
church, that the enchanted circle which embraced the whole of life is
broken, and that they are left with a feeling of emptiness “like that
which follows an attack of fever or an unhappy love affair.” where is
my _home_? cried nietzsche: “for it do i ask and seek, and have sought,
but have not found it. o eternal everywhere, o eternal nowhere, o
eternal in vain.”

to more placid temperaments the pangs of freedom are no doubt less
acute. it is possible for multitudes in time of peace and security
to exist agreeably—somewhat incoherently, perhaps, but without
convulsions—to dream a little and not unpleasantly, to have only now
and then a nightmare, and only occasionally a rude awakening. it is
possible to drift along not too discontentedly, somewhat nervously,
somewhat anxiously, somewhat confusedly, hoping for the best, and
believing in nothing very much. it is possible to be a passable
citizen. but it is not possible to be wholly at peace. for serenity of
soul requires [p008] some better organization of life than a man can
attain by pursuing his casual ambitions, satisfying his hungers, and
for the rest accepting destiny as an idiot’s tale in which one dumb
sensation succeeds another to no known end. and it is not possible
for him to be wholly alive. for that depends upon his sense of being
completely engaged with the world, with all his passions and all the
faculties in rich harmonies with one other, and in deep rhythm with the
nature of things.

these are the gifts of a vital religion which can bring the whole of
a man into adjustment with the whole of his relevant experience. our
forefathers had such a religion. they quarrelled a good deal about the
details, but they had no doubt that there was an order in the universe
which justified their lives because they were a part of it. the acids
of modernity have dissolved that order for many of us, and there are
some in consequence who think that the needs which religion fulfilled
have also been dissolved. but however self-sufficient the eugenic
and perfectly educated man of the distant future may be, our present
experience is that the needs remain. in failing to meet them, it is
plain that we have succeeded only in substituting trivial illusions
for majestic faiths. for while the modern emancipated man may wonder
how anyone ever believed that in this universe of stars and atoms and
multitudinous life, there is a drama in progress of which the principal
event was enacted in palestine nineteen hundred years ago, it is not
really a stranger fable than many which he so readily accepts. he does
not believe the words of the gospel but he believes the best advertised
notion. the older fable may be incredible to-day, but when it [p009]
was credible it bound together the whole of experience upon a stately
and dignified theme. the modern man has ceased to believe in it but he
has not ceased to be credulous, and the need to believe haunts him. it
is no wonder that his impulse is to turn back from his freedom, and to
find someone who says he knows the truth and can tell him what to do,
to find the shrine of some new god, of any cult however newfangled,
where he can kneel and be comforted, put on manacles to keep his hands
from trembling, ensconce himself in some citadel where it is safe and
warm.

for the modern man who has ceased to believe, without ceasing to be
credulous, hangs, as it were, between heaven and earth, and is at
rest nowhere. there is no theory of the meaning and value of events
which he is compelled to accept, but he is none the less compelled to
accept the events. there is no moral authority to which he must turn
now, but there is coercion in opinions, fashions and fads. there is
for him no inevitable purpose in the universe, but there are elaborate
necessities, physical, political, economic. he does not feel himself
to be an actor in a great and dramatic destiny, but he is subject to
the massive powers of our civilization, forced to adopt their pace,
bound to their routine, entangled in their conflicts. he can believe
what he chooses about this civilization. he cannot, however, escape
the compulsion of modern events. they compel his body and his senses
as ruthlessly as ever did king or priest. they do not compel his mind.
they have all the force of natural events, but not their majesty, all
the tyrannical power of ancient institutions, but none of their moral
certainty. events are there, and they overpower [p010] him. but they
do not convince him that they have that dignity which inheres in that
which is necessary and in the nature of things.

in the old order the compulsions were often painful, but there was
sense in the pain that was inflicted by the will of an all-knowing
god. in the new order the compulsions are painful and, as it were,
accidental, unnecessary, wanton, and full of mockery. the modern man
does not make his peace with them. for in effect he has replaced
natural piety with a grudging endurance of a series of unsanctified
compulsions. when he believed that the unfolding of events was a
manifestation of the will of god, he could say: thy will be done.... in
his will is our peace. but when he believes that events are determined
by the votes of a majority, the orders of his bosses, the opinions of
his neighbors, the laws of supply and demand, and the decisions of
quite selfish men, he yields because he has to yield. he is conquered
but unconvinced.


3. _sorties and retreats_

it might seem as if, in all this, men were merely going through once
again what they have often gone through before. this is not the
first age in which the orthodox religion has been in conflict with
the science of the day. plato was born into such an age. for two
centuries the philosophers of greece had been critical of homer and
of the popular gods, and when socrates faced his accusers, his answer
to the accusation of heresy must certainly have sounded unresponsive.
“i do believe,” he said, “that there are gods, and in a higher sense
than that in which [p011] my accusers believe in them.” that is all
very well. but to believe in a “higher sense” is also to believe in a
different sense.

there is nothing new in the fact that men have ceased to believe in the
religion of their fathers. in the history of catholic christianity,
there has always existed a tradition, extending from the authors of the
fourth gospel through origen to the neo-platonists of modern times,
which rejects the popular idea of god as a power acting upon events,
and of immortality as everlasting life, and translates the popular
theology into a symbolic statement of a purely spiritual experience.
in every civilized age there have been educated and discerning men who
could not accept literally and simply the traditions of the ancient
faith. we are told that during the periclean age “among educated men
everything was in dispute: political sanctions, literary values, moral
standards, religious convictions, even the possibility of reaching any
truth about anything.” when the educated classes of the roman world
accepted christianity they had ceased to believe in the pagan gods,
and were much too critical to accept the primitive hebraic theories of
the creation, the redemption, and the messianic kingdom which were so
central in the popular religion. they had to do what socrates had done;
they had to take the popular theology in a “higher” and therefore in a
different sense before they could use it. indeed, it is so unusual to
find an age of active-minded men in which the most highly educated are
genuinely orthodox in the popular sense, that the thirteenth century,
the age of dante and st. thomas aquinas, when this phenomenon is
reputed to have occurred, is regarded [p012] as a unique and wonderful
period in the history of the world. it is not at all unlikely that
there never was such an age in the history of civilized men.

and yet, the position of modern men who have broken with the religion
of their fathers is in certain profound ways different from that of
other men in other ages. this is the first age, i think, in the history
of mankind when the circumstances of life have conspired with the
intellectual habits of the time to render any fixed and authoritative
belief incredible to large masses of men. the dissolution of the
old modes of thought has gone so far, and is so cumulative in its
effect, that the modern man is not able to sink back after a period
of prophesying into a new but stable orthodoxy. the irreligion of
the modern world is radical to a degree for which there is, i think,
no counterpart. for always in the past it has been possible for new
conventions to crystallize, and for men to find rest and surcease of
effort in accepting them.

we often assume, therefore, that a period of dissolution will
necessarily be followed by one of conformity, that the heterodoxy of
one age will become the orthodoxy of the next, and that when this
orthodoxy decays a new period of prophesying will begin. thus we say
that by the time of hosea and isaiah the religion of the jews had
become a system of rules for transacting business with jehovah. the
prophets then revivified it by thundering against the conventional
belief that religion was mere burnt offering and sacrifice. a few
centuries passed and the religion based on the law and the prophets
had in its turn become a set of mechanical rites manipulated by the
scribes and the pharisees. as against this system jesus and paul
[p013] preached a religion of grace, and against the “letter” of
the synagogues the “spirit” of christ. but the inner light which can
perceive the spirit is rare, and so shortly after the death of paul,
the teaching gradually ceased to appeal to direct inspiration in the
minds of the believers and became a body of dogma, a “sacred deposit”
of the faith “once for all delivered to the saints.” in the succeeding
ages there appeared again many prophets who thought they had within
them the revealing spirit. though some of the prophets were burnt,
much of the prophesying was absorbed into the canon. in luther this
sense of revelation appeared once more in a most confident form. he
rejected the authority not only of the pope and the clergy, but even of
the bible itself, except where in his opinion the bible confirmed his
faith. but in the establishment of a lutheran church the old difficulty
reappeared: the inner light which had burned so fiercely in luther
did not burn brightly or steadily in all lutherans, and so the right
of private judgment, even in luther’s restricted use of the term, led
to all kinds of heresies and abominations. very soon there came to be
an authoritative teaching backed by the power of the police. and in
calvinism the revolt of the reformation became stabilized to the last
degree. “everything,” said calvin, “pertaining to the perfect rule of
a good life the lord has so comprehended in his law that there remains
nothing for man to add to that summary.”

men fully as intelligent as the most emancipated among us once believed
that, and i have no doubt that the successors of mr. darrow and mr.
mencken would come to believe something very much like it if conditions
permitted them to obey the instinct to retreat from the chaos [p014]
of modernity into order and certainty. it is all very well to talk
about being the captain of your soul. it is hard, and only a few
heroes, saints, and geniuses have been the captains of their souls for
any extended period of their lives. most men, after a little freedom,
have preferred authority with the consoling assurances and the economy
of effort which it brings. “if, outside of christ, you wish by your
own thoughts to know your relation to god, you will break your neck.
thunder strikes him who examines.” thus spoke martin luther, and there
is every reason to suppose that the german people thought he was
talking the plainest commonsense. “he who is gifted with the heavenly
knowledge of faith,” said the council of trent, “is free from an
inquisitive curiosity.” these words are rasping to our modern ears, but
there is no occasion to doubt that the men who uttered them had made
a shrewd appraisal of average human nature. the record of experience
is one of sorties and retreats. the search for moral guidance which
shall not depend upon external authority has invariably ended in the
acknowledgment of some new authority.


4. _deep dissolution_

this same tendency manifests itself in the midst of our modern
uneasiness. we have had a profusion of new cults, of revivals, and of
essays in reconstruction. but there is reason for thinking that a new
crystallization of an enduring and popular religion is unlikely in the
modern world. for analogy drawn from the experience of the past is
misleading.

when luther, for example, rebelled against the authority [p015] of
the church, he did not suppose the way of life for the ordinary man
would be radically altered. luther supposed that men would continue
to behave much as they had learned to behave under the catholic
discipline. the individual for whom he claimed the right of private
judgment was one whose prejudgments had been well fixed in a catholic
society. the authority of the pope was to be destroyed and certain
evils abolished, but there was to remain that feeling for objective
moral certainties which catholicism had nurtured. when the anabaptists
carried the practice of his theory beyond this point, luther denounced
them violently. for what he believed in was protestantism for good
catholics. the reformers of the eighteenth century made a similar
assumption. they really believed in democracy for men who had an
aristocratic training. jefferson, for example, had an instinctive fear
of the urban rabble, that most democratic part of the population. the
society of free men which he dreamed about was composed of those who
had the discipline, the standards of honor and the taste, without the
privileges or the corruptions, that are to be found in a society of
well-bred country gentlemen.

the more recent rebels frequently betray a somewhat similar inability
to imagine the consequences of their own victories. for the smashing of
idols is in itself such a preoccupation that it is almost impossible
for the iconoclast to look clearly into a future when there will not
be many idols left to smash. yet that future is beginning to be our
present, and it might be said that men are conscious of what modernity
means insofar as they realize that they are confronted not so much with
the [p016] necessity of promoting rebellion as of dealing with the
consequences of it. the nineteenth century, roughly speaking the time
between voltaire and mencken, was an age of terrific indictments and
of feeble solutions. the marxian indictment of capitalism is a case
in point. the nietzschean transvaluation of values is another; it is
magnificent, but who can say, after he has shot his arrow of longing
to the other shore, whether he will find caesar borgia, henry ford, or
isadora duncan? who knows, having read mr. mencken and mr. sinclair
lewis, what kind of world will be left when all the boobs and yokels
have crawled back in their holes and have died of shame?

the rebel, while he is making his attack, is not likely to feel the
need to answer such questions. for he moves in an unreal environment,
one might almost say a parasitic environment. he goes forth to destroy
caesar, mammon, george f. babbitt, and mrs. grundy. as he wrestles
with these demons, he leans upon them. by inversion they offer him
much the same kind of support which the conformer enjoys. they provide
him with an objective which enables him to know exactly what he thinks
he wants to do. his energies are focussed by his indignation. he does
not suffer from emptiness, doubt, and division of soul. these are the
maladies which come later when the struggle is over. while the rebel is
in conflict with the established nuisances he has an aim in life which
absorbs all his passions. he has his own sense of righteousness and his
own feeling of communion with a grand purpose. for in attacking idols
there is a kind of piety, in overthrowing tyrants a kind of loyalty,
in ridiculing stupidities [p017] an imitation of wisdom. in the heat
of battle the rebel is exalted by a whole-hearted tension which is
easily mistaken for a taste of the freedom that is to come. he is
under the spell of an illusion. for what comes after the struggle is
not the exaltation of freedom but a letting down of the tension that
belongs solely to the struggle itself. the happiness of the rebel is as
transient as the iconoclasm which produced it. when he has slain the
dragon and rescued the beautiful maiden, there is usually nothing left
for him to do but write his memoirs and dream of a time when the world
was young.

what most distinguishes the generation who have approached maturity
since the debacle of idealism at the end of the war is not their
rebellion against the religion and the moral code of their parents,
but their disillusionment with their own rebellion. it is common for
young men and women to rebel, but that they should rebel sadly and
without faith in their own rebellion, that they should distrust the
new freedom no less than the old certainties—that is something of a
novelty. as mr. canby once said, at the age of seven they saw through
their parents and characterized them in a phrase. at fourteen they saw
through education and dodged it. at eighteen they saw through morality
and stepped over it. at twenty they lost respect for their home towns,
and at twenty-one they discovered that our social system is ridiculous.
at twenty-three the autobiography ends because the author has run
through society to date and does not know what to do next. for, as mr.
canby might have added, the idea of reforming that society makes no
appeal to them. they have seen through all that. they cannot adopt any
of [p018] the synthetic religions of the nineteenth century. they have
seen through all of them.

they have seen through the religion of nature to which the early
romantics turned for consolation. they have heard too much about
the brutality of natural selection to feel, as wordsworth did, that
pleasant landscapes are divine. they have seen through the religion
of beauty because, for one thing, they are too much oppressed by the
ugliness of main street. they cannot take refuge in an ivory tower
because the modern apartment house, with a radio loudspeaker on the
floor above and on the floor below and just across the courtyard,
will not permit it. they cannot, like mazzini, make a religion of
patriotism, because they have just been demobilized. they cannot make
a religion of science like the post-darwinians because they do not
understand modern science. they never learned enough mathematics and
physics. they do not like bernard shaw’s religion of creative evolution
because they have read enough to know that mr. shaw’s biology is
literary and evangelical. as for the religion of progress, that is
pre-empted by george f. babbitt and the rotary club, and the religion
of humanity is utterly unacceptable to those who have to ride in the
subways during the rush hour.

yet the current attempts to modernize religious creeds are inspired
by the hope that somehow it will be possible to construct a form of
belief which will fit into this vacuum. it is evident that life soon
becomes distracted and tiresome if it is not illuminated by communion
with what william james called “a wider self through which saving
experiences come.” the eager search for new religions, [p019] the
hasty adherence to cults, and the urgent appeals for a reconciliation
between religion and science are confessions that to the modern man
his activity seems to have no place in any rational order. his life
seems mere restlessness and compulsion, rather than conduct lighted by
luminous beliefs. he is possessed by a great deal of excitement amidst
which, as mr. santayana once remarked, he redoubles his effort when he
has forgotten his aim.

for in the modern age, at first imperceptibly with the rise of the
towns, and then catastrophically since the mechanical revolution, there
have gone into dissolution not only the current orthodoxy, but the
social order and the ways of living which supported it. thus rebellion
and emancipation have come to mean something far more drastic than
they have ever meant before. the earlier rebels summoned men from one
allegiance to another, but the feeling for certainty in religion and
for decorum in society persisted. in the modern world it is this very
feeling of certainty itself which is dissolving. it is dissolving not
merely for an educated minority but for everyone who comes within the
orbit of modernity.

yet there remain the wants which orthodoxy of some sort satisfies. the
natural man, when he is released from restraints, and has no substitute
for them, is at sixes and sevens with himself and the world. for in the
free play of his uninhibited instincts he does not find any natural
substitute for those accumulated convictions which, however badly
they did it, nevertheless organized his soul, economized his effort,
consoled him, and gave him dignity in his own eyes because he was part
of some greater whole. the acids of modernity are so powerful that they
do not [p020] tolerate a crystallization of ideas which will serve as
a new orthodoxy into which men can retreat. and so the modern world
is haunted by a realization, which it becomes constantly less easy to
ignore, that it is impossible to reconstruct an enduring orthodoxy, and
impossible to live well without the satisfactions which an orthodoxy
would provide.




chapter ii [p021]

god in the modern world


1. _imago dei_

by the dissolution of their ancestral ways men have been deprived of
their sense of certainty as to why they were born, why they must work,
whom they must love, what they must honor, where they may turn in
sorrow and defeat. they have left to them the ancient codes and the
modern criticism of these codes, guesses, intuitions, inconclusive
experiments, possibilities, probabilities, hypotheses. below the level
of reason, they may have unconscious prejudice, they may speak with a
loud cocksureness, they may act with fanaticism. but there is gone that
ineffable certainty which once made god and his plan seem as real as
the lamppost.

i do not mean that modern men have ceased to believe in god. i do
mean that they no longer believe in him simply and literally. i mean
that they have defined and refined their ideas of him until they can
no longer honestly say that he exists, as they would say that their
neighbor exists. search the writings of liberal churchmen, and when
you come to the crucial passages which are intended to express their
belief in god, you will find, i think, that at just this point their
uncertainty is most evident.

the reverend harry emerson fosdick has written an essay, called “how
shall we think of god?”, which illustrates [p022] the difficulty.
he begins by saying that “believing in god without considering how
one shall picture him is deplorably unsatisfactory.” yet the old ways
of picturing him are no longer credible. we cannot think of him as
seated upon a throne, while around him are angels playing on harps
and singing hymns. “god as a king on high—our fathers, living under
monarchy, rejoiced in that image and found it meaningful. his throne,
his crown, his scepter, his seraphic retinue, his laws, rewards, and
punishments—how dominant that picture was and how persistent is the
continuance of it in our hymns and prayers! it was always partly
poetry, but it had a prose background: there really had been at first a
celestial land above the clouds where god reigned and where his throne
was in the heavens.”

having said that this picture is antiquated, dr. fosdick goes on to
state that “the religious man must have imaginations of god, if god
is to be real to him.” he must “picture his dealing with the divine
in terms of personal relationship.” but how? “the place where man
vitally finds god ... is within his own experience of goodness, truth,
and beauty, and the truest images of god are therefore to be found in
man’s spiritual life.” i should be the last to deny that a man may,
if he chooses, think of god as the source of all that seems to him
worthy in human experience. but certainly this is not the god of the
ancient faith. this is not god the father, the lawgiver, the judge.
this is a highly sophisticated idea of god, employed by a modern man
who would like to say, but cannot say with certainty, that there exists
a personal god to whom men must accommodate themselves. [p023]


2. _an indefinite god_

it may be that clear and unambiguous statements are not now possible in
our intellectual climate. but at least we should not forget that the
religions which have dominated human history have been founded on what
the faithful felt were undeniable facts. these facts were mysterious
only in the sense that they were uncommon, like an eclipse of the sun,
but not in the sense that they were beyond human experience. no doubt
there are passages in the scriptures written by highly cultivated men
in which the divine nature is called mysterious and unknowable. but
these passages are not the rock upon which the popular churches are
founded. no one, i think, has truly observed the religious life of
simple people without understanding how plain, how literal, how natural
they take their supernatural personages to be.

the popular gods are not indefinite and unknowable. they have a
definite history and their favorite haunts, and they have often been
seen. they walk on earth, they might appear to anyone, they are
angered, they are pleased, they weep and they rejoice, they eat and
they may fall in love. the modern man uses the word ‘supernatural’
to describe something that seems to him not quite so credible as
the things he calls natural. this is not the supernaturalism of the
devout. they do not distinguish two planes of reality and two orders of
certainty. for them jesus christ was born of a virgin and was raised
from the dead as literally as napoleon was emperor of the french and
returned from elba.

this is the kind of certainty one no longer finds in the [p024]
utterances of modern men. i might cite, for example, a typically modern
assertion about the existence of god, made by mr. w. c. brownell, a
critic who could not be reproached with insensitiveness to the value of
traditional beliefs. he wrote that “the influence of the holy spirit,
exquisitely called the comforter, is a matter of actual experience,
as solid a reality as that of electro-magnetism.” i do not suppose
that mr. brownell meant to admit the least possible doubt. but he was
a modern man, and surreptitiously doubt invaded his certainty. for
electro-magnetism is not an absolutely solid reality to a layman’s
mind. it has a questionable reality. i suspect that is why mr.
brownell chose this metaphor; it would have seemed a little too blunt
to his modern intelligence to say that his faith was founded not on
electro-magnetism, but as men once believed, on a rock.

the attempts to reconstruct religious creeds are beset by the
modern man’s inability to convince himself that the constitution of
the universe includes facts which in our skeptical jargon we call
supernatural. yet as william james once said, “religion, in her fullest
exercise of function, is not a mere illumination of facts already
elsewhere given, not a mere passion, like love, which views things in
a rosier light.... it is something more, namely, a postulator of new
_facts_ as well.” james himself was strongly disposed toward what he so
candidly described as “overbeliefs”; he had sympathy with the beliefs
of others which was as large and charitable as any man’s can be. there
was no trace of the intellectual snob in william james; he was in the
other camp from those thin argumentative rationalists who find so much
satisfaction [p025] in disproving what other men hold sacred. james
loved cranks and naifs and sought them out for the wisdom they might
have. but withal he was a modern man who lived toward the climax of the
revolutionary period. he had the will to believe, he argued eloquently
for the right to believe. but he did not wholly believe. the utmost
that he could honestly believe was something which he confessed would
“appear a sorry underbelief” to some of his readers. “who knows,” he
said, “whether the faithfulness of individuals here below to their
own poor overbeliefs may not actually help god in turn to be more
effectively faithful to his own greater tasks?” who knows? and on that
question mark he paused and could say no more.


3. _god in more senses than one_

but even if there was some uncertainty as to the existence of the god
whom william james described, he was at least the kind of god with whom
human beings could commune. if they could jump the initial doubt they
found themselves in an exciting world where they might live for a god
who, like themselves, had work to do. james wrote the passage i have
quoted in 1902. a quarter of a century later alfred north whitehead
came to harvard to deliver the lowell lectures. he undertook to define
god for modern men.

mr. whitehead, like william james, is a compassionate man and on the
side of the angels. but his is a wholly modernized mind in full command
of all the conceptual instruments of scientific logic. by contrast with
the austerity of mr. whitehead’s thinking, james, with his [p026]
chivalrous offer of fealty to god, seems like one of the last of the
great romantics. there is a god in mr. whitehead’s philosophy, and a
very necessary god at that. unhappily, i am not enough of a logician
to say that i am quite sure i understand what it means to say that
“god is not concrete, but he is the ground for concrete actuality.”
there have been moments when i imagined i had caught the meaning of
this, but there have been more moments when i knew that i had not. i
have never doubted, however, that the concept had meaning, and that i
missed it because it was too deep for me. why then, it may be asked, do
i presume to discuss it? my answer is that a conception of god, which
is incomprehensible to all who are not highly trained logicians, is a
possible god for logicians alone. it is not presumptuous to say of mr.
whitehead’s god what he himself says of aristotle’s god: that it does
“not lead him very far toward the production of a god available for
religious purposes.”

for while this god may satisfy a metaphysical need in the thinker, he
does not satisfy the passions of the believer. this god does not govern
the world like a king nor watch over his children like a father. he
offers them no purposes to which they can consecrate themselves; he
exhibits no image of holiness they can imitate. he does not chastise
them in sin nor console them in sorrow. he is a principle with which
to explain the facts, if you can understand the explanation. he is
not himself a personality who deals with the facts. for the purposes
of religion he is no god at all; his universe remains stonily unaware
of man. nothing has happened by accepting [p027] mr. whitehead’s
definition which changes the inexorable character of that destiny which
bertrand russell depicted when he wrote that

  we see, surrounding the narrow raft illumined by the flickering
  light of human comradeship, the dark ocean on whose rolling waves
  we toss for a brief hour; from the great night without, a chill
  blast breaks in upon our refuge; all the loneliness of humanity
  amid hostile forces is concentrated upon the individual soul, which
  must struggle alone, with what of courage it can command, against
  the whole weight of a universe that cares nothing for its hopes and
  fears.

it is a nice question whether the use of god’s name is not misleading
when it is applied by modernists to ideas so remote from the god men
have worshiped. plainly the modernist churchman does not believe in the
god of genesis who walked in the garden in the cool of the evening and
called to adam and his wife who had hidden themselves behind a tree;
nor in the god of exodus who appeared to moses and aaron and seventy of
the elders of israel, standing with his feet upon a paved walk as if it
were a sapphire stone; nor even in the god of the fifty-third chapter
of isaiah who in his compassion for the sheep who have gone astray,
having turned everyone to his own way, laid on the man of sorrows the
iniquity of us all.

this, as kirsopp lake says, is the god of most, if not all, the
writings in the bible. yet “however much our inherited sentiments may
shrink from the admission, the scientists are to-day almost unanimous
in saying that the universe as they see it contains no evidence
of the existence [p028] of any anthropomorphic god whatever. the
experimentalist (_i.e._, modernist) wholly agrees that this is so.
nevertheless he refuses as a rule, and i think rightly—to abandon the
use of the word ‘god.’” in justification of this refusal to abandon the
word ‘god,’ although he has abandoned the accepted meaning of the word,
dr. lake appeals to a tradition which reaches back at least to origen
who, as a christian neo-platonist, used the word ‘god’ to mean, not the
king and father of creation, but the sum of all ideal values. it was
this redefinition of the word ‘god,’ he says, which “made christianity
possible for the educated man of the third century.” it is this same
redefinition which still makes christianity possible for educated
churchmen like dr. lake and dean inge.

dr. lake admits that although this attractive bypath of tradition
“is intellectually adorned by many princes of thought and lords of
language” it is “ecclesiastically not free from reproach.” he avows
another reason for his use of the word ‘god’ which, if not more
compelling, is certainly more worldly. “atheist” has meant since roman
times an enemy of society; it gives a wholly false impression of the
real state of mind of those who adhere to the platonic tradition. they
have been wholly without the defiance which “atheism” connotes; on
the contrary they have been a few individuals in each age who lived
peaceably within the shelter of the church, worshiping a somewhat
different god inwardly and in their own way, and often helping to
refresh the more mundane spirit of the popular church. the term
“agnostic” is almost as unavailable. it was invented to describe a
tolerant unbelief in the anthropomorphic god. in popular usage it has
come [p029] to mean about the same thing as atheist, for the instinct
of the common man is sound in these matters. he feels that those who
claim to be open-minded about god have for all practical purposes
ceased to believe in him. the agnostic’s reply that he would gladly
believe if the evidence would confirm it, does not alter the fact that
he does not now believe. and so dr. lake concludes that the modernist
must use the word ‘god’ in his own sense, “endeavoring partly to
preserve origen’s meaning of the word, and partly shrinking from any
other policy as open to misconstruction.”

i confess that the notion of adopting a policy about god somehow shocks
me as intruding a rather worldly consideration which would seem to be
wholly out of place. but this feeling is, i am sure, an injustice to
dr. lake who is plainly and certainly not a worldling. he is moved, no
doubt, by the conviction that in letting ‘god’ mean one thing to the
mass of the devout and another to the educated minority, the loss of
intellectual precision is more than compensated by the preservation
of a community of feeling. this is not mere expediency. it may be the
part of wisdom, which is profounder than mere reasoning, to wish that
intellectual distinctions shall not divide men too sharply.

but if it is wisdom, it is an aristocratic wisdom. and in dean inge’s
writings this is frankly avowed. “the strength of christianity,”
he says, “is in transforming the lives of individuals—of a small
minority, certainly, as christ clearly predicted, but a large number
in the aggregate. to rescue a little flock, here and there, from
materialism, selfishness, and hatred, is the task of the [p030] church
of christ in all ages alike, and there is no likelihood that it will
ever be otherwise.”

but in other ages, one thing was otherwise. and in this one thing
lies the radical peculiarity of the modern difficulty. in other ages
there was no acknowledged distinction between the ultimate beliefs of
the educated and the uneducated. there were differences in learning,
in religious genius, in the closeness of a chosen few to god and his
angels. inwardly there were even radical differences of meaning. but
critical analysis had not made them overt and evident, and the common
assumption was that there was one god for all, for the peasant who saw
him dimly and could approach him only through his patron saint, and for
the holy man who had seen god and talked with him face to face. it has
remained for churchmen of our era to distinguish two or more different
gods, and openly to say that they are different. this may be a triumph
of candor and of intelligence. but this very consciousness of what they
are doing, these very honest admissions that the god of dean inge, for
example, is only in name the god of millions of other protestants—that
is an admission, when they understand it, which makes faith difficult
for modern men.


4. _the protest of the fundamentalists_

fundamentalism is a protest against all these definitions and
attenuations which the modern man finds it necessary to make. it is
avowedly a reaction within the protestant communions against what
the president of the world’s christian fundamentalist association
rather accurately described as “that weasel method of sucking the
meaning [p031] out of words, and then presenting the empty shells in
an attempt to palm them off as giving the christian faith a new and
another interpretation.” in actual practice this movement has become
entangled with all sorts of bizarre and barbarous agitations, with the
ku klux klan, with fanatical prohibition, with the “anti-evolution
laws,” and with much persecution and intolerance. this in itself
is significant. for it shows that the central truth, which the
fundamentalists have grasped, no longer appeals to the best brains
and the good sense of a modern community, and that the movement is
recruited largely from the isolated, the inexperienced, and the
uneducated.

into the politics of the heated controversy between modernists and
fundamentalists i do not propose here to enter. that it is not merely
a dispute in the realm of the spirit is made evident by the president
of the fundamentalist association when he avers that “nothing” holds
modernists and fundamentalists together except “the billions of dollars
invested. nine out of ten of these dollars, if not ninety-nine out of
every hundred of them, spent to construct the great denominational
universities, colleges, schools of second grade, theological
seminaries, great denominational mission stations, the multiplied
hospitals that bear denominational names, the immense publication
societies and the expensive societies were given by fundamentalists
and filched by modernists. it took hundreds of years to collect this
money and construct these institutions. it has taken only a quarter of
a century for the liberal bandits to capture them....”

not all the fundamentalist argument, however, is pitched at this
level. there is also a reasoned case against [p032] the modernists.
fortunately this case has been stated in a little book called
_christianity and liberalism_ by a man who is both a scholar and a
gentleman. the author is professor j. gresham machen of the princeton
theological seminary. it is an admirable book. for its acumen, for its
saliency, and for its wit this cool and stringent defense of orthodox
protestantism is, i think, the best popular argument produced by either
side in the current controversy. we shall do well to listen to dr.
machen.

modernism, he says, “is altogether in the imperative mood,” while
the traditional religion “begins with a triumphant indicative.” i
do not see how one can deny the force of this generalization. “from
the beginning christianity was certainly a way of life. _but how was
the life to be produced?_ not by appealing to the human will, but by
telling a story; not by exhortation, but by the narration of an event.”
dr. machen insists, rightly i think, that the historic influence of
christianity on the mass of men has depended upon their belief that
an historic drama was enacted in palestine nineteen hundred years
ago during the reign of the emperor tiberius. the veracity of that
story was fundamental to the christian church. for while all the
ideal values may remain if you impugn the historic record set forth
in the gospels, these ideal values are not certified to the common
man as inherent in the very nature of things. once they are deprived
of their root in historic fact, their poetry, their symbolism, their
ethical significance depend for their sanction upon the temperament
and experience of the individual believer. there is gone that deep,
compulsive, organic faith in an external fact which is the essence of
religion for all but [p033] that very small minority who can live
within themselves in mystical communion or by the power of their
understanding. for the great mass of men, if the history of religions
is to be trusted, religious experience depends upon a complete belief
in the concrete existence, one might almost say the materialization,
of their god. the fundamentalist goes to the very heart of the matter,
therefore, when he insists that you have destroyed the popular
foundations of religion if you make your gospel a symbolic record of
experience, and reject it as an actual record of events.

the liberals have yet to answer dr. machen when he says that “the
christian movement at its inception was not just a way of life in the
modern sense, but a way of life founded upon a message. it was based,
not upon mere feeling, not upon a mere program of work, but on an
account of facts.” it was based on the story of the birth, the life,
the ministry, the death, and the resurrection of jesus christ. that
story set forth the facts which certify the christian experience.
modernism, which in varying degree casts doubt upon the truth of that
story, may therefore be defined as an attempt to preserve selected
parts of the experience after the facts which inspired it have been
rejected. the orthodox believer may be mistaken as to the facts in
which he believes. but he is not mistaken in thinking that you cannot,
for the mass of men, have a faith of which the only foundation is
their need and desire to believe. the historic churches, without any
important exceptions, i think, have founded faith on clear statements
about matters of fact, historic events, or physical manifestations.
they have never been content [p034] with a symbolism which the
believer knew was merely symbolic. only the sophisticated in their
private meditations and in esoteric writing have found satisfaction in
symbolism as such.

complete as was dr. machen’s victory over the protestant liberals,
he did not long remain in possession of the field. there is a deeper
fundamentalism than his, and it is based on a longer continuous
experience. this is the teaching of the roman catholic church. from
a priest of that church, father riggs, has come the most searching
criticism of dr. machen’s case. writing in the _commonweal_ father
riggs points out that “the fundamentalists are well-nigh powerless.
they are estopped, so to speak, from stemming the ravaging waters
of agnosticism because they cannot, while remaining loyal to the
(protestant) reformers ... set limits to destructive criticism of the
bible without making an un-protestant appeal to tradition.” father
riggs, in other words, is asking the protestant fundamentalists, like
dr. machen, how they can be certain that they know these _facts_ upon
which they assert that the christian religion is founded.

they must reply that they know them from reading the bible. the
reply is, however, unsatisfying. for obviously there are many ways
of reading the bible, and therefore the protestant who demands the
right of private judgment can never know with absolute certainty that
his reading is the correct one. his position in a skeptical age is,
therefore, as father riggs points out, a weak one, because a private
judgment is, after all, only a private judgment. the history of
protestantism shows that the exercise of private judgment as to the
meaning of scripture [p035] leads not to universal and undeniable
dogma, but to schism within schism and heresy within heresy. from
the point of view, then, of the oldest fundamentalism of the western
world the error of the modernists is that they deny the facts on which
religious faith reposes; the error of the orthodox protestants is
that although they affirm the facts, they reject all authority which
can verify them; the virtue of the catholic system is that along with
a dogmatic affirmation of the central facts, it provides a living
authority in the church which can ascertain and demonstrate and verify
these facts.


5. _in man’s image_

the long record of clerical opposition to certain kinds of scientific
inquiry has a touch of dignity when it is realized that at the core of
that opposition there is a very profound understanding of the religious
needs of ordinary men. for once you weaken the belief that the central
facts taught by the churches are facts in the most literal and absolute
sense, the disintegration of the popular religion begins. we may
confidently declare that mr. santayana is speaking not as a student of
human nature, but as a cultivated unbeliever, when he writes that “the
idea that religion contains a literal, not a symbolic, representation
of truth and life is simply an impossible idea.” the idea is
impossible, no doubt, for the children of the great emancipation. but
because it is impossible, religion itself, in the traditional popular
meaning of the term, has become impossible for them.

if it is true that man creates god in his own image, it is no less true
that for religious devotion he must remain [p036] unconscious of that
fact. once he knows that he has created the image of god, the reality
of it vanishes like last night’s dream. it may be that to anyone who is
impregnated with the modern spirit it is almost self-evident that the
truths of religion are truths of human experience. but this knowledge
does not tolerate an abiding and absorbing faith. for when the truths
of religion have lost their connection with a superhuman order, the
cord of their life is cut. what remains is a somewhat archaic, a
somewhat questionable, although a very touching, quaint medley of
poetry, rhetoric, fable, exhortation, and insight into human travail.
when mr. santayana says that “matters of religion should never be
matters of controversy” because “we never argue with a lover about
his taste, nor condemn him, if we are just, for knowing so human a
passion,” he expresses an ultimate unbelief.

for what would be the plight of a lover, if we told him that his
passion was charming?—though, of course, there might be no such lady
as the one he loved.




chapter iii [p037]

the loss of certainty


1. _ways of reading the bible_

it is important to an understanding of this matter that we should not
confuse the modern practice of redefining god with the ancient use of
allegory.

from the earliest days the words of the bible have been embroidered
with luxuriant and often fantastic meanings. in leviticus it says,
for example, that the meal offering may be baked in an oven, fried in
a pan, or toasted on a plate. this passage, says origen, proves that
scripture must have three meanings. it came to have any number of
meanings. thus st. augustine explained that eden meant the life of the
blessed, and its four rivers the four virtues; farther on in the same
chapter he declares that eden is the church, and that its four rivers
are the four gospels.

in the same manner wyclif in a later age preached a sermon explaining
the parable of the good samaritan. the man who went down from jerusalem
to jericho represents adam and eve; the robbers are the fiends of hell;
the priest and levite who went by on the other side are the patriarchs,
saints, and prophets who failed to bring salvation; the good samaritan
is jesus; the wine which he pours into his wounds is sharp words to
prick men from sin, and the oil is hope.... savonarola, we are [p038]
told, preached during the whole of lent, 1492, taking as his text
noah’s ark and “giving each day a different interpretation of the ten
planks of which the ark was composed.”

by this method of interpretation the devout adapted the bible to
their own uses, smoothing away its contradictions and explaining
away passages, like the command in genesis to kill uncircumcised
children, which, read literally, would have seemed to them barbarous
and immoral. we must be careful, however, not to misunderstand this
method of thought. when they said that the beautiful woman in the song
of solomon was the church, they were not conscious, as we are, that
this is a figure of speech. there had not entered into their habits of
thought the kind of analytical precision in which one thing can mean
only one thing. it is no contradiction to say that the allegory was
taken literally; certainly there was no sense of unreality about it,
as there is for us. “these and similar allegorical interpretations may
be suitably put ...” says st. augustine, speaking here to the educated
minority, “without giving offense to anyone, while yet we believe the
strict truth of the history confirmed by its circumstantial narrative
of facts.”

but at last men became too analytical and too self-conscious to accept
the naive use of allegory. they realized that allegory was a loose
method of interpretation which lent itself easily to the citing of
scripture in order to justify heresy. if the ten planks in noah’s ark
could mean a different set of truths on each day in lent, there was
no telling what they might come to mean in the end. it was clear,
therefore, that allegory was dangerous [p039] and might, as luther
said, “degenerate into a mere monkey game”; it was wanton, like “a sort
of beautiful harlot who proves herself spiritually seductive to idle
men.”

this danger was a result of the general loosening of organic
faith which was already evident in luther’s day. to men who had
the unconscious certainties about god and his universe, allegory
was a perfectly safe method of interpreting the bible because all
the interpretations, however fantastic, were inspired by the same
pre-judgments and tended therefore to confirm the same convictions. the
allegories of simple men are like many-colored flowers in one garden,
growing from the same soil, watered by the same rains, turning their
faces toward the same sun. but as men became emancipated from their
ancestral way of life, their convictions about god and destiny and
human morality changed. then the method of allegory ceased to be the
merely exuberant expression of the same ancient truths, and became a
confusing method of rationalizing all kinds of new experiments. it
promoted heresy because men had become heretical, where once, while men
were devout, it had only embroidered their devotions.

“to allegorize is to juggle with scripture,” said luther. the
protestant reformers could not tolerate that. for they lived in an
age when faith was already disintegrating, and they had themselves
destroyed the authority of an infallible source of religion. “we must,”
wrote calvin, “entirely reject the allegories of origen, and of others
like him, which satan, with the deepest subtlety, has endeavored to
introduce into the church, for the [p040] purpose of rendering the
doctrine of scripture ambiguous and destitute of all certainty and
firmness.”

the insistence of the reformers on a literal interpretation of the
bible had, as dr. fosdick points out, two unforeseen results. it led
to the so-called higher criticism which in substance is nothing but a
scientific attempt to find out what the bible did mean literally to
those who wrote it. and this in turn made it practically impossible for
modern men to believe all that the bible literally says. when they read
the bible as allegory they found in it unending confirmation of what
they already believed. but when they read it literally, as history, as
astronomy, and biology, and as a code of laws, it contradicted at many
crucial points the practical working convictions of their daily lives.
“the consequence is,” says dr. fosdick, “that we face the biblical
world made historically vivid over against the modern world presently
experienced, and we cannot use the old method (_i.e._ allegory) of
accommodating one to the other.”


2. _modernism: immortality as an example_

this predicament forced modern churchmen to seek what dr. fosdick calls
“a new solution.” they could not believe that the bible was taken down,
as john donne put it, by “the secretaries of the holy ghost.” yet they
believed, as every sane man does, that the bible contains wisdom which
bears deeply upon the conduct of human life. their problem was to find
a way of picking and choosing passages in the scriptures, and then of
interpreting those which were chosen in such a way as to make them
credible to modern men. they had to find some [p041] way of setting
aside the story that god made eve out of adam’s rib, that god commanded
the massacre of whole populations, and that he enjoyed the slaughter of
animals at the sacrifice; but they had at the same time to find a way
of preserving for the use of modern men the lessons of the ministry of
jesus and the promise of life everlasting.

the method they employ is based on a theory. it is a theory that the
bible contains “abiding messages” placed in a “transient setting.” the
bible, for example, is full of stories about devils and angels. now,
modern men do not believe in devils and angels. these are “categories”
which they have outgrown. but what the devils and angels stood for
are evils and blessings which modern men still encounter. we have,
therefore, only to “decode” the bible, and where it speaks of devils
to see temptations, sin, disease, pain, and suffering, which have a
psychic origin; where it speaks of angels to remember that sense of
unseen friendliness which may help us at a crisis in our lives. the old
wine is still good, but it needs to be put in new bottles. “the modern
preacher’s responsibility is thus to decode the abiding meanings of
scripture from outgrown phraseology.”

this is not so difficult a thing to do for the devils and the angels.
but a little reflection will show, i think, that in dealing with
the major themes of religion, the solution is not so easy. the real
difficulty appears when dr. fosdick attempts to decode the biblical
promise of immortal life.

he begins by rejecting completely the resurrection of the flesh and
any kind of immortality which is imagined as the survival of the
physical person. yet he believes [p042] in “the persistence of
personality through death.” for he maintains that without this belief
the final victory of death would signify “the triumphant irrationality
of existence”; not to believe in immortality is to submit to “mental
confusion.” speaking quite frankly, however, he cannot easily imagine
“a completely disembodied existence.” yet it is obviously not easy to
imagine the persistence of personality through death once you have made
up your mind not to imagine a concrete heaven inhabited by well-defined
persons.

modern churchmen, like dean inge for example, who have faced the
difficulty more boldly than dr. fosdick does, arrive at an intelligible
explanation of what they mean by immortality. but they mean something
which is not only very difficult to understand, but extremely difficult
for most men to enjoy when they have understood it. they inject
intelligible meaning into the word “eternal” by employing it in a sense
which is wholly different from that which the common man employs.
by immortality he means life that goes on age after age without
stopping. but the modern churchmen who have really clarified their
minds are platonists. they apply the word “eternal” to that which is
independent of time and existence. between the two conceptions there
is the profoundest difference, for in the commonsense of the worldling
existence is so precious that he wishes it to continue for ever and
ever. but to the platonist existence, or embodiment, is transient,
accidental, irrational; only that is permanent which is timeless.
commonsense demands that if we are immortal we should meet our friend
again later and continue our friendship; the platonist [p043] loves
the memory of his friend after death as he loved an ideal image of him
during his life. in communing with his memories and his ideals he knows
himself to be in touch with eternal things. for not even the gods, says
homer, can undo the past; no accident of mortality can destroy anything
which can be represented in the mind. heroes die, but that such heroic
deeds were done is a chapter forever, as mr. santayana says, in any
complete history of the universe. the thinker dies, but his thoughts
are beyond the reach of destruction. men are mortal; but ideas are
immortal.

i do not know whether i have known how to state clearly what is meant
by this platonic view to which, in varying degrees of clarity, all
emancipated minds turn when they talk of immortality. but, at least, it
is clear that it is a conception which calls for a radically different
adjustment to life than that to which the worldling is accustomed. he
desires objects to love, goods and successes that are perishable, and
he wishes them not to perish. before he can enter the platonic world,
before he can even attain to a hint of its meaning, he must abandon the
very desires of which his hope of immortality is the expression. he
must detach himself from his wish to acquire and possess objects that
die; he must learn what it means to possess things not by holding them,
but by understanding them, and to enjoy them as objects of reflection.
he must not only cease to desire immortality as he conceives it, but
the material embodiment of things as well. then only, when he has
renounced his love of existence, can he begin to love the forms of
existence, and to live among imperishable ideas. [p044] then, and in
this sense only, does he enter into eternal life.

the ordinary man, when he hears this doctrine expounded, is almost
certain to say with the indian sage: “the worship of the impersonal
laid no hold upon my heart.” his heart is set on the enjoyment of
worldly goods, and the doctrine, for all but a few exceptional spirits,
requires a radical change of heart. it is forbidding except to the few
in whom “the intellect (is) passionate and the passions cold.” for it
demands a conversion of their natural desire to possess tangible things
into a passion to understand intangible and abstract things. this
philosophy is ascetic, unworldly, and profoundly disinterested.

now it can be argued that this is precisely what the gospels teach as
to the meaning of salvation. excellent authority can be cited from the
gospel of john and the epistles of st. paul to justify this form of
the christian tradition: “flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom
of god” ... “the things that are seen are temporal, but the things
that are not seen are eternal” ... “i see another law in my members,
warring against the law of my mind.” it can hardly be denied, as dean
inge says, that “we are able to carry back to the fountain-head that
christian tradition” which may quite accurately be described as the
religion of the spirit. but mixed with it in the scripture, there is
the other tradition, the popular tradition which may be called the
religion of commonsense. out of this latter have grown the institutions
of the church and the faith of the mass of men. the religion of the
spirit has been reserved for a few, “a succession [p045] of lives
which have been sheltered rather than inspired by the machinery and
statecraft of a mighty institution,” and while the few who lived the
life of the spirit have undoubtedly done much to inspire the popular
religion with new insight, they have been, on the whole, a group apart.

yet those who belonged to these two distinct traditions did use the
same churches and the same symbolism. there was an even deeper bond of
unity between them. both believed that renunciation and self-discipline
are the way of salvation—in the religion of the spirit as the way to
enter now into love of eternal things; in the religion of commonsense
as a rather heavy price paid to god in return for everlasting happiness
after death. it may be argued, therefore, by churchmen like dr.
fosdick, that the “abiding message” of the bible about immortality is
that men must renounce the world in order to win eternity. that some
men mean by eternity a kind of perpetual motion and others a kind of
abstraction is merely a difference in their habits of thought, and does
not impair the validity or the importance of the central experience. if
they will renounce their worldly passions, they will find what the idea
of eternity has to give, no matter what they imagine it to mean.

but although dr. fosdick implies that this solves the difficulty, it
can be shown, i believe, that it does not. what he has succeeded in
doing is to disentangle from the bible a meaning for immortality which
has a noble tradition behind it and is at the same time intellectually
possible for a modern man. but the history of religion ought to put
us on guard against assuming too easily [p046] that a statement of
the purest truth is in itself capable of affecting the lives of any
considerable number of people. dean inge, who is a very much more
clear-headed churchman, says quite frankly that “a religion succeeds,
not because it is true, but because it suits the worshippers.” merely
to tell men, however fervently, that they may conquer mortality by
renouncing the flesh, will not go far toward persuading many of them
to renounce the flesh. there must be, as there has been in all the
historic religions, something more than a statement of the moral law.
there must be a psychological machinery for enforcing the moral law.

for those who are suited to the religion of the spirit no machinery is
needed. but for the mass of men who are not naturally suited to it,
a machinery which compels this conversion is indispensable. jesus in
his time, and gautama buddha before him, taught a moral law which was
addressed to those who could receive it. they were not many. buddhism
and christianity became world religions centuries after the death of
their founders, and only when there had been added to the central
message a great organized method of teaching it.

the essence of such an organization is the title to say with apostolic
certainty that the message is true. churchmen, like dr. fosdick, can
make no such claim about their message. they reject revelation. they
reject the authority of any church to speak directly for god. they
reject the literal inspiration of the bible. they reject altogether
many parts of the bible as not only uninspired, but false and
misleading. they do not believe in god as a lawgiver, judge, father,
and spectator of human life. [p047] when they say that this or that
message in the bible is “permanently valid,” they mean only that in
their judgment, according to their reading of human experience, it is
a well-tested truth. to say this is not merely to deny that the bible
is authoritative in astronomy and biology; it is to deny equally that
it is authoritative as to what is good and bad for men. the bible thus
becomes no more than a revered collection of hypotheses which each man
may reject or accept in the light of his own knowledge.

the lessons may still be true. but they are robbed of their certainty.
each man is thrown back upon his own resources; he is denied the
support which all popular religion offers him, the conviction that
outside himself there is a power on which he can and must lean for
guidance. in the ancient faith a man said: “i believe this on the
authority of an all-wise god.” in the new faith he is in effect
compelled to say: “i have examined the alleged pronouncements of an
all-knowing god; some of them are obviously untrue, some are rather
repulsive, others, however, if they are properly restated, i find to be
exceedingly good.”

something quite fundamental is left out of the modernist creeds. at
least something which has hitherto been quite fundamental is left
out. that something is the most abiding of all the experiences of
religion, namely, the conviction that the religion comes from god.
suppose it were true, which it plainly is not, that dr. fosdick by his
process of selection and decoding has retained “precisely the thing
at which the bible was driving.” still he would be without the thing
on which popular religion [p048] has been founded. for the bible to
our ancestors was not simply, as he implies, a book of wisdom. it was
a book of wisdom backed by the power of god himself. that is not an
inconsiderable difference. it is all the difference there is between a
pious resolution and a moral law.

the bible, as men formerly accepted it, contained wisdom _certified_
by the powers that govern the universe. it did not merely contain many
well-tested truths, similar in kind to those which are to be found in
plato, aristotle, montaigne, and bernard shaw. it contained truths
which could not be doubted because they had been spoken by god through
his prophets and his son. they could not be wrong. but once it is
allowed that each man may select from the bible as he sees fit, judging
each passage by his own notions of what is “abiding,” you have stripped
the scriptures of their authority to command men’s confidence and to
compel their obedience. the scriptures may still inspire respect. but
they are disarmed.


3. _what modernism leaves out_

many reasons have been adduced to explain why people do not go to
church as much as they once did. surely the most important reason is
that they are not so certain that they are going to meet god when they
go to church. if they had that certainty they would go. if they really
believed that they were being watched by a supreme being who is more
powerful than all the kings of earth put together, if they really
believed that not only their actions but their secret thoughts were
known and would be remembered by the creator and ultimate judge of the
[p049] universe, there would be no complaint whatever about church
attendance. the most worldly would be in the front pews, and preachers
would not have to resort so often to their rather desperate expedients
to attract an audience. if the conviction were there that the creed
professed was invincibly true, the modern congregation would not come
to church, as they usually do to-day, to hear the preacher and to
listen to the music. they would come to worship god.

religious professions will not work when they rest merely on a kind of
passive assent; or on intricate reasoning, or on fierce exhortation, or
on a good-natured conspiracy to be vague and highflown. a man cannot
cheat about faith. either he has it in the marrow of his bones, or in
a crisis, when he is distracted and in sorrow, there is no conviction
there to support him. without complete certainty religion does not
offer genuine consolation. it is without the strength to compensate
our weakness. nor can it sanction the rules of morality. ethical codes
cannot lay claim to unhesitating obedience when they are based upon the
opinions of a majority, or on the notions of wise men, or on estimates
of what is socially useful, or on an appeal to patriotism. for they
depend then on the force which happens to range itself behind them at a
particular time; or on their convenience for a moment. they are felt to
be the outcome of human, and therefore quite fallible, decisions. they
are no necessary part of the government of the universe. they were not
given by god to moses on sinai. they are not the commandments of god
speaking through his infallible church.

a human morality has no such sanction as a divine. [p050] the
sanction of a divine morality is the certainty of the believer that it
originated with god. but if he has once come to think that the rule of
conduct has a purely human, local, and temporal origin, its sanction is
gone. his obedience is transformed, as ours has been by knowledge of
that sort, from conviction to conformity or calculated expediency.

without certainty there can be no profound sense that a man’s own
purpose has become part of the purpose of the whole creation. it
is necessary to believe in a god who is active in the world before
a man can feel himself to be, as st. paul said, “a fellow laborer”
with god. yet this sense of partnership with a person who transcends
the individual’s own life, his own ego, and his own capacities, is
fundamental in all popular religion. it underlies all the other
elements of religion. for in the certainty that he is enlisted with
god, man finds not only comfort in defeat, not only an ideal of
holiness which persuades him to renounce his immediate desires, but an
ecstatic mobilizing of all his scattered energies in one triumphant
sense of his own infinite importance.




chapter iv [p051]

the acids of modernity


1. _the kingly pattern_

what i have said thus far can be reduced to the statement that it is
difficult for modern men to conceive a god whom they can worship. yet
it would be a crude misunderstanding of religious experience to assume
that it depends upon a clear conception of god. in truly religious
men the experience of god is much more intensely convincing than any
definition of his nature which they can put into words. they do not
insist on understanding that which they believe, for their belief
gives them a consciousness of divinity which transcends any conviction
they could reach by the understanding. they are not oppressed by the
conflict between reason and faith because the testimony of faith
is irresistible. it may become so irresistible that any attempt to
understand is finally held, as it was by john chrysostom, to be an
impertinence.

st. chrysostom, who is described by the _catholic encyclopedia_ as the
most prominent doctor of the greek church and the greatest preacher
ever heard in a christian pulpit, is a striking example of how in
other ages a man who was both learned and devout was able to surmount
the intellectual difficulties which to-day cause so much trouble for
modernists and fundamentalists alike. chrysostom was born at antioch
in the middle of the fourth century and grew up in a time when the
intellectual [p052] foundations of christianity were intensely
disputed. the catholic theology had not yet emerged victoriously, and
antioch was the theatre of fierce struggles between pagans, manichæans,
gnostics, arians, jews, and others. these struggles turned in
considerable measure upon just such attempts to define and comprehend
god as now confuse the teaching of the protestant church. among the
sectarians there were some who claimed that it was possible “to know
god exactly” and it was against them that chrysostom preached that
“he insults god who seeks to apprehend his essential being.” for “the
difference between the being of god and the being of man is of such a
kind that no word can express it and no thought can appraise it.... he
dwells, says st. paul, in an unapproachable light.” even the angels in
heaven are stupefied by the glory and majesty of god: “tell me,” he
says, “wherefore do they cover their faces and hide them with their
wings? why but that they cannot endure the dazzling radiance and its
rays that pour from the throne?”

here in language so eloquent that the author became known as
chrysostom, “the golden-mouthed,” we have the doctrine that “a
comprehended god is no god,” that “god is incomprehensible because he
is blessed and blessed because he is incomprehensible.” but if we look
more closely at what chrysostom actually says, it is apparent that he
has a much clearer idea of god than he knows. he conceives of god as
the creator, the ruler, and the judge of the universe. when he says
that god is incomprehensible he means that it is impossible for a human
being to imagine what it would be like to be god. but [p053] that does
not prevent chrysostom from knowing what it is like to be the creature
of the incomprehensible god. he is very definitely on his knees before
the throne of a divine king whose radiance is so dazzling that he
cannot look his lord in the face.

there is thus a very solid intellectual conception embedded in the
faith of this great teacher who staked everything on the assertion that
it is impossible to conceive god. the conception is there but it has
not been isolated and realized. it is unconsciously assumed. we find
the same thing in luther when he said: “i venture to put my trust in
the one god alone, the invisible and incomprehensible, who hath created
heaven and earth and is alone above all creatures.” for in spite of
the fact that luther calls god incomprehensible, he is able to make a
number of extremely important statements about him. he is able to say
that god is the only god, that he created the earth, that there is a
heaven, that god created heaven, and that god alone is above all his
creatures. to know that much about god is to comprehend the function of
god if not his nature.

now if we examine the religious difficulty of modern men, we find,
i think, that they do not lack the sense of mystery, of majesty, of
terror, and of wonder which overwhelm chrysostom and luther. the
emotional disposition is there. but it is somehow inhibited from
possessing them utterly. the will to believe is checked by something
in their experience which chrysostom did not have. that something is
the sense that the testimony of faith is not wholly credible, that the
feeling of sanctity is no assurance of the existence of sacred powers,
that awe and [p054] wonder and terror in the breast of the believer
are not guarantees that there exist real objects that are awful and
wonderful. the modern man is not incapable of faith, but he has within
him a contrary passion, as instinctive and often as intense as faith,
which makes incredible the testimony of his faith.

it is that contrary passion, and not the thin argumentation of atheists
and agnostics, which lies, i think, at the root of what churchmen call
modern irreligion. it is that passion which they must understand if
they are ever to understand the modern religious difficulty. for just
as men could surmount any intellectual difficulty when their passion to
believe was whole-hearted, so to-day, when the passion to disbelieve
is so strong, they are unable to believe no matter how perfectly their
theological dilemmas are resolved.

we must ask ourselves, then, what there is in modern men which makes
the testimony of faith seem more or less incredible to them. we have
seen in the citations from chrysostom and luther that the testimony of
faith really contains a large number of unconscious statements of fact
about the universe and how it is governed. it is these statements of
fact which we are no longer able to assume unconsciously, and having
become conscious of them they are rather incredible. but why are they
no longer unconsciously assumed and why are they incredible? the answer
is, i think, that they have ceased to be consistent with our normal
experience in ordinary affairs.

the faith of chrysostom and luther is entangled with, and supported
upon, the assumption that the universe [p055] was created and is
governed by a father and king. they had projected upon the universe
an imaginary picture which reflected their own daily experience of
government among men. these pictures of how the universe is governed
change with men’s political experience. thus it would not have been
easy for an asiatic people to imagine the divine government in any
other way but as a despotism, and yahveh, as he appears in many
famous portraits in the old testament, is very evidently an oriental
monarch inclined to be somewhat moody and very vain. he governs as he
chooses, constrained by no law, and often without mercy, justice, or
righteousness. the god of mediæval christianity, on the other hand,
is more like a great feudal lord, supreme and yet bound by covenants
to treat his vassals on earth according to a well-established system
of reciprocal rights and duties. the god of the enlightenment in the
eighteenth century is a constitutional monarch who reigns but does not
govern. and the god of modernism, who is variously pictured as the
_élan vital_ within the evolutionary process, or as the sum total of
the laws of nature, is really a kind of constitutionalism deified.

provided that the picture is so consistent with experience that it
is taken utterly for granted, it will serve as a background for the
religious experience. but when daily experience for one reason or
another provides no credible analogy by which men can imagine that
the universe is governed by a supernatural king and father, then the
disposition to believe, however strong it may be at the roots, is like
a vine that reaches out and can find nothing solid upon which to grow.
it cannot support [p056] itself. if faith is to flourish, there must
be a conception of how the universe is governed to support it.

it is these supporting conceptions—the unconscious assumption that
we are related to god as creatures to creator, as vassals to a king,
as children to a father—that the acids of modernity have eaten away.
the modern man’s daily experience of modernity makes instinctively
incredible to him these unconscious ideas which are at the core of the
great traditional and popular religions. he does not wantonly reject
belief, as so many churchmen assert. his predicament is much more
serious. with the best will in the world, he finds himself not quite
believing.

in the last four hundred years many influences have conspired to make
incredible the idea that the universe is governed by a kingly person.
an account of all of these influences would be a history of the growth
of modern civilization. i am attempting nothing so comprehensive or
so ambitious. i should like merely to note certain aspects of that
revolutionary change which, as lord acton says, came “unheralded”
and “founded a new order of things ... sapping the ancient reign of
continuity.” for that new order of things has made it impossible for
us to believe, as plainly and literally as our forefathers did, that
the universe is a monarchy administered on this planet through divinely
commissioned, and, therefore, unimpeachably authoritative ministers.


2. _landmarks_

in a famous passage at the beginning of _heretics_, mr. chesterton
says that “nothing more strangely indicates the enormous and silent
evil of modern society than [p057] the extraordinary use which is
made nowadays of the word ‘orthodox.’ in former days the heretic was
proud of not being a heretic. it was the kingdom of the world and the
police and the judges who were heretics. he was orthodox. all the
tortures born out of forgotten hells could not make him admit that he
was heretical. but a few modern phrases have made him boast of it. he
says with a conscious laugh, ‘i suppose i am very heretical,’ and looks
around for applause. the word ‘heresy’ not only means no longer being
wrong; it practically means being clear-headed and courageous.”

mr. chesterton goes on to explain that this change of attitude has come
about because “people care less for whether they are philosophically
right than they used to care.” it may be so. but if they cared as much
or more, it would not help them. to be orthodox is to believe in the
right doctrines and to follow the ancient rules of living deduced from
a divine revelation. the modern man finds that the doctrines do not fit
what he believes to be true, and that the rules do not show him how
to conduct his life. for he is confronted at every turn with radical
novelties about which his inherited dogma teaches him something which
is plainly unworkable, or, as is even more often the case, teaches him
nothing at all.

in the old world there were, of course, novelties, too. but the pace
of change was so slow that it did not seem to cause radical change.
there was ample time to make subtle and necessary revisions of the
fundamental assumptions of right and wrong without seeming to challenge
the distinction between right and wrong. looking back at it in long
perspective we can see now that there was [p058] a constant evolution
of the christian faith from the apostles to the later councils of the
church. but in relation to the life of any individual the change was so
slow that men could honestly believe that the catholicism of hildebrand
was identical with the christianity of paul. men had few means of
reconstructing the past, and few ways of knowing how great was the
variety of belief at any one time within the frontiers of christendom.
within their horizon, change came too slowly to seem like change,
because only that seems to move which moves rather fast.

for that reason the large changes which took place were not vividly
realized. the small, quick changes, of which men were conscious, could
therefore easily be made to seem, especially since men were not too
exact and observant, as inevitable deductions from unchanging premises.
even in the great arguments over the nature of christ, the rights of
church and empire, the meaning of grace and transubstantiation, both
sides appealed in theory to the same premises. each side asserted that
it was following the true revelation. and since ordinary men for the
most part never heard the other side, except from their own priests and
doctors, they had no reason for doubting that the side on which they
happened to find themselves was absolutely right. they did not have to
choose between competing creeds; they had merely to defend their creed,
which was the true one, against the enemies of god. and so if they were
disturbed by the quarrel, they were not disturbed much by doubt.

the grand adjustments were taken for granted, and within that framework
men could make the minor adjustments patiently and elaborately, letting
them become [p059] habitual and well-worn. this, perhaps, is the
secret of the charm that an old civilization has for us to-day. we
feel that here is a way of life which men have had time to refine and
to embellish. the modern man in a progressive community has neither
the time nor the energy for this delightful superficiality. he is
too busy solving fundamental problems. he is so free to question his
premises that he is no longer free to work out his conclusions. his
philosophy of life is like the skyscraper; it is nine-tenths structure.
so much effort has gone into constructing it, and making it fit to
bear the strains, it is so new and yet it will so soon be out of
date, that nobody is much interested in the character of it. but a
mediæval cathedral, like the mediæval philosophy, was built slowly over
generations and was to last forever; it is decorated inside and out,
where it can be seen and where it cannot be seen, from the crypt to the
roof.

the modern man is an emigrant who lives in a revolutionary society and
inherits a protestant tradition. he must be guided by his conscience.
but when he searches his conscience, he finds no fixed point outside of
it by which he can take his bearings. he does not really believe that
there is such a point, because he himself has moved about too fast to
fix any point long enough in his mind. for the sense of authority is
not established by argument. it is acquired by deep familiarity and
indurated association. the ancient authorities were blended with the
ancient landmarks, with fields and vineyards and patriarchal trees,
with ancient houses and chests full of heirlooms, with churchyards
near at hand and their ancestral graves, with old men who remembered
wise sayings they [p060] had heard from wise old men. in that kind of
setting it is natural to believe that the great truths are known and
the big questions settled, and to feel that the dead themselves are
still alive and are watching over the ancient faith.

but when creeds have to be proved to the doubting they are already
blighted; arguments are for the unbelievers and the wavering, for
those who have never had, and for those who have lost these primordial
attachments. faith is not a formula which is agreed to if the weight
of evidence favors it. it is a posture of man’s whole being which
predisposes him to assimilate, not merely to believe, his creed.
when the posture is native to him, in tune with the rhythm of his
surroundings, his faith is not dependent upon intellectual assent. it
is a serene and whole-hearted absorption, like that of the infant to
its mother, in the great powers outside which govern his world. when
that union of feeling is no longer there, as it is not there for a
large part of our talkative fundamentalist sects, we may be sure that
corrosive doubting has begun. the unlovely quality of much modern
religiosity is due to these doubts. so much of its belief is synthetic.
it is forced, made, insisted upon, because it is no longer simple and
inevitable. the angry absurdities which the fundamentalists propound
against “evolution” are not often due to their confidence in the
inspiration of the bible. they are due to lack of confidence, to doubt
resisted like an annoying tune which a man cannot shake out of his
head. for if the militant fundamentalists were utterly sure they are
right, they would exhibit some of that composure which the truly devout
display. did they [p061] really trust their god, they would trust
laws, politicians, and policemen less. but because their whole field of
consciousness is trembling with uncertainties they are in a state of
fret and fuss; and their preaching is frousy, like the seductions of an
old coquette.


3. _barren ground_

the american people, more than any other people, is composed of
individuals who have lost association with their old landmarks. they
have crossed an ocean, they have spread themselves across a new
continent. the american who still lives in his grandfather’s house
feels almost as if he were living in a museum. there are few americans
who have not moved at least once since their childhood, and even if
they have staid where they were born, the old landmarks themselves
have been carted away to make room for progress. that, perhaps, is one
reason why we have so much more americanism than love of america. it
takes time to learn to love the new gas station which stands where the
wild honeysuckle grew. moreover, the great majority of americans have
risen in the world. they have moved out of their class, lifting the
old folks along with them perhaps, so that together they may sit by
the steam pipes, and listen to the crooning of the radio. but more and
more of them have moved not only out of their class, but out of their
culture; and then they leave the old folks behind, and the continuity
of life is broken. for faith grows well only as it is passed on from
parents to their children amidst surroundings that bear witness,
because nothing changes radically, to a deep permanence in the order of
the world. it is true, [p062] no doubt, that in this great physical
and psychic migration some of the old household gods are carefully
packed up and put with the rest of the luggage, and then unpacked and
set up on new altars in new places. but what can be taken along is at
best no more than the tree which is above the ground. the roots remain
in the soil where first they grew.

the sidewalks of a city would in any case be a stony soil in which to
transplant religion. throughout history, as spengler points out, the
large city has bred heresies, new cults, and irreligion. now when we
speak of modern civilization we mean a civilization dominated by the
culture of the great metropolitan centers. our own civilization in
america is perhaps the most completely urbanized of all. for even the
american farmers, though they live in the country, tend to be suburban
rather than rural. i am aware of how dominating a role the population
outside the great cities plays in american life. yet it is in the
large cities that the tempo of our civilization is determined, and the
tendency of mechanical inventions as well as economic policy is to
create an irresistible suction of the country towards the city.

the deep and abiding traditions of religion belong to the countryside.
for it is there that man earns his daily bread by submitting to
superhuman forces whose behavior he can only partially control. there
is not much he can do when he has ploughed the ground and planted his
seed except to wait hopefully for sun and rain from the sky. he is
obviously part of a scheme that is greater than himself, subject to
elements that transcend his powers and surpass his understanding. the
city is an acid that dissolves [p063] this piety. how different it is
from an ancient vineyard where men cultivate what their fathers have
planted. in a modern city it is not easy to maintain that “reverent
attachment to the sources of his being and the steadying of his life by
that attachment.” it is not natural to form reverent attachments to an
apartment on a two-year lease, and an imitation mahogany desk on the
thirty-second floor of an office building. in such an environment piety
becomes absurd, a butt for the facetious, and the pious man looks like
a picturesque yokel or a stuffy fool.

yet without piety, without a patriotism of family and place, without
an almost plant-like implication in unchangeable surroundings, there
can be no disposition to believe in an external order of things. the
omnipotence of god means something to men who submit daily to the
cycles of the weather and the mysterious power of nature. but the city
man puts his faith in furnaces to keep out the cold, is proudly aware
of what bad sewage his ancestors endured, and of how ignorantly they
believed that god, who made adam at 9 a.m. on october 23 in the year
4004 b.c., was concerned with the behavior of adam’s children.


4. _sophisticated violence_

much effort goes into finding substitutes for this radical loss of
association. there is the americanization movement, for example,
which in some of its public manifestations has as much resemblance to
patriotism as the rape of the sabine women had to the love of dante
for beatrice. there is the vociferous nationalism of the [p064]
hundred percenters which is always most eloquent when it is about to
be most rowdy. there are the anxious outcries of the sectarians who
in their efforts to revive the religion of their fathers show the
utmost contempt for the aspirations of their sons. there is mr. henry
ford hastily collecting american antiques before his cars destroy
the whole culture which produced them. there is mr. lothrop stoddard
looking every man in the eye to see whether it is nordic blue. there
are a thousand and one patently artificial, sometimes earnest, often
fantastic fundamentalist agitations. they are all attempts to impose
quickly by one kind of sophisticated violence or another a posture of
faith which can be genuine only when it belongs to the unquestioned
memories of the soul. they are a shrill insistence that men ought to
feel that which no man can feel who does not already feel it in the
marrow of his bones.

novelties crowd the consciousness of modern men. the machinery of
intelligence, the press, the radio, the moving picture, have enormously
multiplied the number of unseen events and strange people and queer
doings with which he has to be concerned. they compel him to pay
attention to facts that are detached from their backgrounds, their
causes and their consequences, and are only half known because they are
not seen or touched or actually heard. these experiences come to him
having no beginning, no middle, and no end, mere flashes of publicity
playing fitfully upon a dark tangle of circumstances. i pick up a
newspaper at the start of the day and i am depressed and rejoiced to
learn that: anthracite miners have struck in pennsylvania; that a price
boost [p065] plot is charged; that mr. ziegfeld has imported a blonde
from england who weighs 112 pounds and has pretty legs; that the pope,
on the other hand, has refused to receive women in low-necked dress and
with their arms bare; that airplanes are flying to hawaii; and that the
mayor says that the would-be mayor is a liar....

now in an ordered universe there ought to be place for all human
experiences. but it is not strange that the modern newspaper reader
finds it increasingly difficult to believe that through it all there is
order, permanence, and connecting principle. such experience as comes
to him from the outside is a dissonance composed of a thousand noises.
and amidst these noises he has for inner guidance only a conscience
which consists, as he half suspects, of the confused echoes of earlier
tunes.


5. _rulers_

he cannot look to his betters for guidance. the american social system
is migratory, revolutionary, and protestant. it provides no recognized
leaders and no clear standards of conduct. no one is recognized as the
interpreter of morals and the arbiter of taste. there is no social
hierarchy, there is no acknowledged ruling class, no well-known system
of rights and duties, no code of manners. there are smart sets, first
families, and successful people, to whom a good deal of deference is
paid and a certain tribute of imitation. but these leaders have no real
authority in morals or in matters of taste because they themselves have
few standards that are not the fashions of a season. they exercise,
therefore, an almost autocratic power over deportment at the country
club. [p066] but what they believe about god, salvation, or the
destiny of america nobody knows, not even they themselves.

there have been perhaps three ruling classes in america, the puritan
merchants, the knickerbocker gentry, and the cavalier planters of
the south. each presided for a few generations over an ordered
civilization. but the new englanders uprooted themselves and went west,
and those who have been left behind are marooned in a flood of aliens.
the knickerbocker squirearchy dissolved in the commercial greatness of
new york, and the southern aristocracy was overthrown and ruined by a
social revolution which culminated in the civil war. they have left no
successors, and unless and until american society becomes stabilized
once more somewhere for a few generations, they are not likely to have
any successors.

our rulers to-day consist of random collections of successful men and
their wives. they are to be found in the inner circles of banks and
corporations, in the best clubs, in the dominant cliques of trade
unions, among the political churchmen, the higher manipulating bosses,
the leading professional catholics, baptists, methodists, irish,
germans, jews, and the grand panjandrums of the secret societies.
they give orders. they have to be consulted. they can more or less
effectively speak for, and lead some part of, the population. but none
of them is seated on a certain throne, and all of them are forever
concerned as to how they may keep from being toppled off. they do not
know how they happen to be where they are, although they often explain
what are the secrets of success. they have been educated to achieve
success; few of them have been educated to exercise power. nor [p067]
do they count with any confidence upon retaining their power, nor of
handing it on to their sons. they live, therefore, from day to day, and
they govern by ear. their impromptu statements of policy may be obeyed,
but nobody seriously regards them as having authority.




chapter v [p068]

the breakdown of authority


1. _god’s government_

the dissolution of the ancestral order is still under way, and much
of our current controversy is between those who hope to stay the
dissolution and those who would like to hasten it. the prime fact about
modernity, as it presents itself to us, is that it not merely denies
the central ideas of our forefathers but dissolves the disposition to
believe in them. the ancestral tradition still lives in many corners of
the world. but it no longer represents for us, as it did for dante and
for st. thomas aquinas seven hundred years ago, the triumphant wisdom
of the age. a child born in a modern city may still learn to use the
images of the theological drama, but more or less consciously he is
made to feel that in using them he is not speaking of things that are
literally and exactly true.

its dogma, as mr. santayana once said, is insensibly understood to
be nothing but myth, its miracles nothing but legend, its sacraments
mere symbols, its bible pure literature, its liturgy just poetry, its
hierarchy an administrative convenience, its ethics an historical
accident, and its whole function simply to lend a warm mystical aureole
to human culture and ignorance. the modern man does not take his
religion as a real account of the constitution, the government, the
history, and the actual destiny of the [p069] universe. with rare
exceptions his ancestors did. they believed that all their activities
on this earth had a sequel in other activities hereafter, and that
they themselves in their own persons would be alive through all the
stretches of infinite time to experience this fulfilment. the sense of
actuality has gone out of this tremendous conception of life; only the
echoes of it persist, and in our memories they create a world apart
from the world in which we do our work, a noble world perhaps in which
it is refreshing to dwell now and then, and in anxiety to take refuge.
but the spaces between the stars are so great; the earth is now so
small a planet in the skies; man is so close, as st. francis said, to
his brother the ass, that in the daylight he does not believe that a
great cosmic story is being unfolded of which his every thought and act
is a significant part. the universe may have a conscious purpose, but
he does not believe he knows just what it is; humanity may be acting
out a divine drama, but he is not certain that he knows the plot.

there has gone out of modern life a working conviction that we are
living under the dominion of one supreme ideal, the attainment of
eternal happiness by obedience to god’s will on earth. this conviction
found its most perfect expression in the period which begins with st.
augustine’s _city of god_ and culminates in the _divine comedy_ of
dante. but the underlying intuitions are to be found in nearly all
popular religion; they are the creature’s feeling of dependence upon
his creator, a sense that his destiny is fixed by a being greater than
himself. at the bottom of it there is a conviction that the universe
is governed by superhuman persons, that the daily visible [p070]
life of the world is constitutionally subject to the laws and the
will of an invisible government. what the thinkers of the middle ages
did was to work out in elaborate detail and in grandiose style the
constitutional system under which supernatural government operates. it
is not fanciful, and i hope not irreverent, to suggest that the great
debates about the nature of the trinity and the godhead were attempts
to work out a theory of divine sovereignty; that the debates about
election and predestination and grace are attempts to work out a theory
of citizenship in a divine society. the essential idea which dominates
the whole speculation is man’s relation to a heavenly king.

as this idea was finally worked out by the legists and canonists and
scholastics

  every ordering of a human community must appear as a component part
  of that ordering of the world which exists because god exists,
  and every earthly group must appear as an organic member of that
  _civitas dei_, that god-state, which comprehends the heavens and
  the earth. then, on the other hand, the eternal and other-worldly
  aim and object of every individual man must, in a directer or an
  indirecter fashion, determine the aim and object of every group
  into which he enters.

  but as there must, of necessity, be connection between the various
  groups, and as all of them must be connected with the divinely
  ordered universe, we come by the further notion of a divinely
  instituted harmony which pervades the universal whole and every
  part thereof. to every being is assigned its place in that whole,
  and to every link between beings corresponds a divine decree....

there is no need to suppose that everyone in the middle ages
understood the theory, as gierke describes it here, [p071] in all its
architectural grandeur. nevertheless, the theory is implicit in the
feeling of simple men. it is the logical elaboration of the fundamental
belief that the god who governs the world is no mere abstraction made
up of hazy nouns and a vague adoration, but that, as henry adams says,
he is the feudal seigneur to whom roland, when he was dying, could
proffer “his right-hand glove” as a last act of homage, such as he
might have made to charlemagne, and could pray:

  o god the father who has never lied,
  who raised up saint lazarus from death,
  and daniel from the lions saved,
  save my soul from all the perils
  for the sins that in my life i did!


2. _the doctrine of the keys_

the theory of divine government has always presented some difficulties
to human reason, as we can see even in st. augustine, who never clearly
made up his mind whether the city of god was the actual church presided
over by the bishop of rome or whether it was an ideal and invisible
congregation of the saved. but we may be sure that to plainer minds it
was necessary to believe that god governs mankind through the agency
of the visible church. the unsophisticated man may not be realistic,
but he is literal; he would be quite incapable, we may be sure, of
understanding what st. thomas meant when he asked “why should not the
same sacred letter ... contain several senses founded on the literal?”
he would accept all the senses but he would accept them all literally.
and taking them literally he would have to believe that [p072] if god
governs the world, he governs it, not in some obscure meaning of the
term, but that he actually governs it, as a king who is mightier than
charlemagne, but not essentially unlike charlemagne.

the disposition to believe in the rule of god depended, therefore, upon
the capacity to believe in a visible church upon earth which holds its
commission from god. in some form or another all simple people look
to a priestly caste who make visible the divine power. without some
such actualization the human imagination falters and becomes vagrant.
the catholic church by its splendor and its power and its universality
during the middle ages must have made easily credible the conception
of god the ruler. it was a government exercising jurisdiction over
the known world, powerful enough to depose princes, and at its head
was the pope who could prove by the evidence of scripture that he was
the successor to peter and was the vice-gerent of god. to ask whether
this grandiose claim was in fact true is, from the point of view of
this argument, to miss the point. it was believed to be true in the
middle ages. because it was believed, the church flourished. because
the church flourished, it was ever so much easier to be certain that
the claim was true. when men said that god ruled the world, they had
evidence as convincing as we have when we say that the president is
head of the united states government; they were convinced because they
came into daily contact with god’s appointees administering god’s laws.

it is this concrete sense of divine government which modern men have
lost, and it may well be that this is where the reformation has
exercised its most revolutionary [p073] effect. what luther did was
to destroy the pretensions not only of the roman catholic church, but
of any church and of any priestly class to administer god’s government
on earth. the protestant reformers may not have intended to destroy
as deeply as they did; the theocracies established by calvin and knox
imply as much. but, nevertheless, when luther succeeded in defying the
holy see by rejecting its claim that it was the exclusive agent of god,
he made it impossible for any other church to set up the same claim and
sustain it for any length of time.

  now christ says that not alone in the church is there forgiveness
  of sins, but that where two or three are gathered together in his
  name, they shall have the right and the liberty to proclaim and
  promise to each other comfort and the forgiveness of sins.... we
  are not only kings and the freest of all men, but also priests
  forever, a dignity far higher than kingship, because by that
  priesthood we are worthy to appear before god, to pray for others,
  and to teach one another mutually the things which are of god.

this denial of the special function of the priesthood did not, of
course, originate with luther. its historical antecedents go back to
the primitive christians; there is quotable authority for it in st.
augustine. it was anticipated by wyclif and huss and by many of the
mystics of the middle ages. but luther, possibly because the times were
ripe for it, translated the denial of the authority of the priesthood
into a political revolution which divided christendom. when the
reformation was an accomplished fact, men looked out upon the world
and no longer saw a single catholic apostolic church as the visible
embodiment of god’s government. a large part of [p074] mankind, and
that an economically and politically powerful part, no longer believed
that christ gave to simon peter and his successors at the roman see the
keys of the kingdom of heaven with the promise that “whatsoever thou
shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.”


3. _the logic of toleration_

as a result of the great religious wars the governing classes were
forced to realize that unless they consented to the policy of
toleration they would be ruined. there is no reason to suppose that
except among a few idealists toleration has ever been much admired
as a principle. it was originally, and in large measure it still is,
nothing but a practical necessity. for in its interior life no church
can wholly admit that its rivals may provide an equally good vehicle of
salvation.

martin luther certainly had none of the modern notion that one church
is about as good as the next. to be sure he appealed to the right
of private judgment, but he made it plain nevertheless that in his
opinion “pagans or turks or jews or fake christians” would “remain
under eternal wrath and an everlasting damnation.” john calvin let
it be known in no uncertain tone that he did not wish any new sects
in geneva. milton, writing his beautiful essay on liberty, drew the
line at papists. and in our own day the _catholic encyclopedia_ says
in the course of an eloquent argument for practical civic toleration
that “as the true god can tolerate no strange gods, the true church
of christ can tolerate no strange churches beside herself, [p075]
or, what amounts to the same, she can recognize none as theoretically
justified.” this is the ancient dogma that outside the church there is
no salvation—_extra ecclesiam nulla salus_. like many another dogma
of the roman church, it is not even in theory absolutely unbending.
thus it appears from the allocution of pope pius ix, _singulari quadam_
(1854), that “those who are ignorant of the true religion, if their
ignorance is invincible (which means, if they have never had a chance
to know the true religion) are not, in this matter, guilty of any fault
in the sight of god.”

as a consequence of the modern theory of religious freedom the
churches find themselves in an anomalous position. inwardly, to
their communicants, they continue to assert that they possess the
only complete version of the truth. but outwardly, in their civic
relations with other churches and with the civil power, they preach
and practice toleration. the separation of church and state involves
more than a mere logical difficulty for the churchman. it involves a
deep psychological difficulty for the members of the congregation.
as communicants they are expected to believe without reservation
that their church is the only true means of salvation; otherwise the
multitude of separate sects would be meaningless. but as citizens
they are expected to maintain a neutral indifference to the claims of
all the sects, and to resist encroachments by any one sect upon the
religious practices of the others. this is the best compromise which
human wisdom has as yet devised, but it has one inevitable consequence
which the superficial advocates of toleration often overlook. it is
difficult to remain warmly convinced that the authority [p076] of any
one sect is divine, when as a matter of daily experience all sects have
to be treated alike.

the human soul is not so divided in compartments that a man can be
indifferent in one part of his soul and firmly believing in another.
the existence of rival sects, the visible demonstration that none has
a monopoly, the habit of neutrality, cannot but dispose men against an
unquestioning acceptance of the authority of one sect. so many faiths,
so many loyalties, are offered to the modern man that at last none
seems to him wholly inevitable and fixed in the order of the universe.
the existence of many churches in one community weakens the foundation
of all of them. and that is why every church in the heyday of its power
proclaims itself to be catholic and intolerant.

but when there are many churches in the same community, none can make
wholly good the claim that it is catholic. none has that power to
discipline the individual which a universal church exercises. for, as
dr. figgis puts it, when many churches are tolerated, “excommunication
has ceased to be tyrannical by becoming futile.”


4. _a working compromise_

if the rival churches were not compelled to tolerate each other, they
could not, consistently with their own teaching, accept the prevailing
theory of the public school. under that theory the schools are silent
about matters of faith, and teachers are supposed to be neutral on the
issues of history and science which bear upon religion. the churches
permit this because they cannot agree on the dogma they would wish to
have taught. the catholics would rather have no dogma in the schools
than [p077] protestant dogma; the fundamentalists would rather have
none than have modernist. this situation is held to be a good one. but
that is only because all the alternatives are so much worse. no church
can sincerely subscribe to the theory that questions of faith do not
enter into the education of children.

wherever churches are rich enough to establish their own schools, or
powerful enough to control the public school, they make short work
of the “godless” school. either they establish religious schools of
their own, as the catholics and lutherans have done, or they impose
their views on the public schools as the fundamentalists have done
wherever they have the necessary voting strength. the last fight of
mr. bryan’s life was made on behalf of the theory that if a majority
of voters in tennessee were fundamentalists then they had the right
to make public education in tennessee fundamentalist too. one of the
standing grievances of the catholic church in america is that catholics
are taxed to support schools to which they cannot conscientiously send
their children.

as a matter of fact non-sectarianism is a useful political phrase
rather than an accurate description of what goes on in the schools. if
there is teaching of science, that teaching is by implication almost
always agnostic. the fundamentalists point this out, and they are quite
right. the teaching of history, under a so-called non-sectarian policy,
is usually, in this country, a rather diluted protestant version of
history. the catholics are quite right when they point this out.
occasionally, it may be, a teacher of science appears who has managed
to assimilate his science to his theology; now and then a catholic
history teacher [p078] will depart from the standard textbooks to give
the catholic version of disputed events during the last few hundred
years. but the chief effect of the non-sectarian policy is to weaken
sectarian attachment, to wean the child from the faith of his fathers
by making him feel that patriotism somehow demands that he shall not
press his convictions too far, that commonsense and good fellowship
mean that he must not be too absolute. the leaders of the churches
are aware of this peril. every once in a while they make an effort
to combat it. committees composed of parsons, priests, and rabbis
appear before the school boards and petition that a non-sectarian
god be worshipped and the non-controversial passages of the bible be
read. they always agree that the present godless system of education
diminishes the sanctions of morality and the attendance at their
respective churches. but they disagree when they try to agree on the
nature of a neutral god, and they have been known to dispute fiercely
about a non-controversial text of the ten commandments. so, if the
sects are evenly balanced, the practical sense of the community turns
in the end against the reform.


5. _the effect of patriotism_

modern governments are not merely neutral as between rival churches.
they draw to themselves much of the loyalty which once was given to the
churches. in fact it has been said with some truth that patriotism has
many of the characteristics of an authoritative religion. certainly
it is true that during the last few hundred years there has been
transferred to government a considerable [p079] part of the devotion
which once sustained the churches.

in the older world the priest was a divinely commissioned agent and
the prince a divinely tolerated power. but by the sixteenth century
melanchthon, a friend of luther’s, had denied that the church could
make laws binding the conscience. only the prince, he said, could do
that. out of this view developed the much misunderstood but essentially
modern doctrine of the divine right of kings. in its original historic
setting this doctrine was a way of asserting that the civil authority,
embodied in the king, derived its power not from the pope, as god’s
viceroy on earth, but by direct appointment from god himself. the
divine right of kings was a declaration of independence as against
the authority of the church. this heresy was challenged not only by
the pope, but by the presbyterians as well. and it was to combat
the presbyterian preachers who insisted on trying to dictate to the
government that king james i wrote his _true law of free monarchy_,
asserting the whole doctrine of the divine right of kings.

in the religious peace of augsburg an even more destructive blow was
struck at the ancient claim of the church that it is a universal power.
it was agreed that the citizen of a state must adopt the religion of
his king. _cuius regio ejus religio._ this was not religious liberty as
we understand it, but it was a supreme assertion of the civil power.
where once the church had administered religion for the multitude, and
had exercised the right to depose an heretical king, it now became
the prerogative [p080] of the king to determine the religious duties
of his subjects. the way was open for the modern absolute state, a
conception which would have been entirely incomprehensible to men who
lived in the ages of faith.

we must here avoid using words ambiguously. when i speak of the
absolute state, i do not refer to the constitutional arrangement of
powers within the state. it is of no importance in this connection
whether the absolute power of the state is exercised by a king,
a landed aristocracy, bankers and manufacturers, professional
politicians, soldiers, or a random majority of voters. it does not
matter whether the right to govern is hereditary or obtained with the
consent of the governed. a state is absolute in the sense which i
have in mind when it claims the right to a monopoly of all the force
within the community, to make war, to make peace, to conscript life,
to tax, to establish and disestablish property, to define crime, to
punish disobedience, to control education, to supervise the family,
to regulate personal habits, and to censor opinions. the modern state
claims all these powers, and in the matter of theory there is no real
difference in the size of the claim between communists, fascists, and
democrats. there are lingering traces in the american constitutional
system of the older theory that there are inalienable rights which
government may not absorb. but these rights are really not inalienable
because they can be taken away by constitutional amendment. there
is no theoretical limit upon the power of the ultimate majorities
which create civil government. there are only practical limits. they
are restrained by inertia, and by prudence, even by good will. but
ultimately [p081] and theoretically they claim absolute authority as
against all foreign states, as against all churches, associations, and
persons within their jurisdiction.

the victory of the civil power was not achieved everywhere at the same
time. spasmodically, with occasional setbacks, but in the long run
irresistibly, the state has attained supremacy. in the feudal age the
monarch was at no time sovereign. the pope was the universal lawgiver,
not only in what we should call matters of faith, but in matters
of business and politics as well. as late as the beginning of the
seventeenth century, pope paul v insisted that the doge of the venetian
republic had no right to arrest a canon of the church on the charge of
flagrant immorality. when, nevertheless, the canon was arrested, the
pope laid venice under an interdict and excommunicated the doge and the
senate. but the venetian government answered that it was founded on
divine right; its title to govern did not come from the church. in the
end the pope gave way, and “the reign of the pope,” says dr. figgis,
“as king of kings was over.”

it was as a result of the loss of its civil power that the roman church
evolved the modern doctrine of infallibility. this claim, as dr. figgis
points out, is not the culmination but the (implicit) surrender of
the notions embodied in the famous papal bull, _unam sanctam_. the
pope could no longer claim the political sovereignty of the world; he
then asserted supreme rights as the religious teacher of the catholic
communion. “the pope, from being the lord of lords, has become the
doctor of doctors. from being the mother of states, the curia [p082]
has become the authoritative organ of a teaching society.”


6. _the dissolution of a sovereignty_

thus there has gradually been dissolving the conception that the
government of human affairs is a subordinate part of a divine
government presided over by god the king. in place of one church which
is sovereign over all men, there are now many rival churches, rival
states, voluntary associations, and detached individuals. god is no
longer believed to be a universal king in the full meaning of the
word king, and religious obedience is no longer the central loyalty
from which all other obligations are derived. religion has become
for most modern men one phase in a varied experience; it no longer
regulates their civic duties, their economic activities, their family
life, and their opinions. it has ceased to have universal dominion,
and is now held to be supreme only within its own domain. but there
is much uncertainty as to what that domain is. in actual affairs,
the religious obligations of modern men are often weaker than their
social interests and generally weaker than the fiercer claims of
patriotism. the conduct of the churches and of churchmen during the
war demonstrated that fact overwhelmingly. they submitted willingly or
unwillingly to the overwhelming force of the civil power. against this
force many men claim the right of revolution, or at least the right of
passive resistance and conscientious objection. sometimes they base
their claims upon a religious precept which they hold sacred. but even
in their disobedience to caesar they are forced to acknowledge that
loyalty in the modern world is complex, that it has become [p083]
divided and uncertain, and that the age of faith which was absolute
is gone for them. however reverent they may be when they are in their
churches, they no longer feel wholly assured when they listen to the
teaching that these are the words of the ministers of a heavenly king.




chapter vi [p084]

lost provinces


1. _business_

in any scheme of things where the churches, as agents of god, assert
the right to speak with authority about the conduct of life they should
be able to lay down rules about the way business shall be carried on.
the churches once did just that. in some degree they still attempt to
do it. but the attempts have grown feebler and feebler. in the last
six hundred years the churches have fought a losing battle against the
emancipation of business from religious control.

the early christian writers looked upon business as a peril to the
soul. although the church was in itself, among other things, a large
business corporation, they did not countenance business enterprise.
money-making they called avarice and money-lending usury, just as they
spoke of lust when they meant sexual desire. they had sound reasons of
their own for this attitude. they knew from observation, perhaps even
from introspection, that the desire for riches is so strong a passion
that men possessed by it will devote only their odd moments to god. the
objection to a business career was like the objection to fornication;
it diverted the energies of the soul.

there were, no doubt, worldly reasons as well which account for the
long resistance of the mediæval church [p085] to what we now regard
as the highest form of capitalistic endeavor. the church belonged to
the feudal system. the pope and his bishops were in fact great feudal
lords. they thrived best in a social order where men lived upon the
land. they had a premonition that the rise of capitalism, with its
large cities, its financiers, merchants, and proletarian workers, was
bound to weaken the secular authority of the church and to dissolve the
influence of religion in men’s lives. they failed in their resistance,
but surely one can hardly say that their vision was not prophetic.
the drastic legislation of the church against business was enacted
in the early days of capitalism; it was inspired, like the english
corn laws and many another agrarian measure, by a determination to
preserve a landed order of society. thus in discussing whether money
might properly be loaned out at interest pope innocent iv argued that
if this were permitted “men would not give thought to the cultivation
of their land, except when they could do naught else ... even if they
could get land to cultivate, they would not be able to get the beasts
and implements for cultivating it, since the poor themselves would not
have them, and the rich, both for the sake of profit and security,
would put their money into usury rather than into smaller and more
risky investments.” the argument is the same as that which the american
farmer makes when he complains that the bankers in wall street prefer
to lend money to business men and to speculators rather than to farmers.

but the solid reasons which once inspired the church’s opposition to
business do not concern us here. the opposition was unsuccessful, the
reasons were forgotten, and [p086] the old pronouncements against
usury were looked upon as quaint and unworldly. for the new economic
order which displaced feudalism, the catholic church, at least, had no
program. it did not adapt itself readily to the spirit of commercial
enterprise which captured the active minds of northern europe. the
protestant churches did adapt themselves and contrived to preach a
gospel which encouraged, where roman catholicism had discouraged, the
enterprising business man. they preached the divine duty of labor. “at
the day of doom,” said john bunyan, “men shall be judged according to
their fruits. it will not be said then, did you believe? but, were you
doers, or talkers only?” as this preaching became more concrete, to
be a doer meant to do work and make money. baxter in his _christian
directory_ wrote that “if god show you a way in which you may lawfully
get more than in another way (without wrong to your soul or to any
other), if you refuse this, and choose the less gainful way, you cross
one of the ends of your calling, and you refuse to be god’s steward.”
richard steele in _the tradesman’s calling_ pointed out that the
virtues enjoined on christians—diligence, moderation, sobriety, and
thrift—are the very qualities which are most needed for commercial
success. for “godly wisdom ... comes in and puts due bounds” to his
expenses, “and teaches the tradesman to live rather somewhat below than
at all above his income.”

however edifying such doctrine may have been, it was clearly an
abandonment of the right, once so eloquently asserted by the church,
that it had the authority to regulate business in the interest of man’s
spiritual welfare. that right is still sometimes asserted. sermons are
still [p087] preached about business ethics; there are programs of
christian socialism and christian capitalism. churchmen still interest
themselves, often very effectively, to reform some flagrant industrial
abuse like the sweating of women and children. but the modern efforts
to moralize business and to subordinate profit-seeking to humane ends
are radically different from those of the mediæval church. they are
admittedly experimental—that is to say, debatable—since they do not
derive their authority from revelation. and they are presented as an
appeal to reason, to conscience, to generosity, not as the commandments
of god. the council of vienna in 1312 declared that any ruler or
magistrate who sanctioned usury and compelled debtors to observe
usurious contracts would be excommunicated; all laws which sanctioned
money-lending at interest were to be repealed within three months. the
churches do not speak in that tone of voice to-day.

thus if an organization like the federal council of churches of christ
is distressed by, let us say, the labor policy of a great corporation,
it inquires courteously of the president’s secretary whether it would
not be possible for him to confer with a delegation about the matter.
if the churchmen are granted an interview, which is never altogether
certain, they have to argue with the business man on secular grounds.
were they to say that the eight-hour day was the will of god, he
would conclude they were cranks, he would surreptitiously press the
buzzer under his desk, and in a few moments his secretary would appear
summoning him to an important board meeting. they have to argue with
him, if they are to obtain a hearing, about the effect on health,
efficiency, turnover, [p088] and other such matters which are worked
up for them by economists. as churchmen they have kindly impulses, but
there is no longer a body of doctrine in the churches which enables
them to speak with authority.

the emancipation of business from religious control is perhaps even
more threatening to the authority of the churches than the rivalry of
sects or the rise of the civil power. business is a daily occupation;
government meets the eye of the ordinary men only now and then. that
the main interest in the waking life of most people should be carried
on wholly separated from the faith they profess means that the churches
have lost one of the great provinces of the human soul. the sponsors
of the broadway temple in new york city put the matter in a thoroughly
modern, even if it was a rather coarse, way when they proclaimed a
campaign to sell bonds as “a five percent investment in your fellow
man’s salvation—broadway temple is to be a combination of church and
skyscraper, religion and revenue, salvation and 5 percent—and the 5
percent is based on ethical christian grounds.” the five percent, they
hastened to add, was also based on a gilt-edged real-estate mortgage;
the salvation, however, was, we may suppose, a speculative profit.


2. _the family_

the family is the inner citadel of religious authority and there the
churches have taken their most determined stand. long after they had
abandoned politics to caesar and business to mammon, they continued
to insist upon their authority to fix the ideal of sexual relations.
but here, too, the dissolution of their authority has proceeded
[p089] inexorably. they have lost their exclusive right to preside
over marriages. they have not been able to maintain the dogma that
marriage is indissoluble. they are not able to prevent the remarriage
of divorced persons. although in many jurisdictions fornication and
adultery are still crimes, there is no longer any serious attempt to
enforce the statutes. the churches have failed in their insistence that
sexual intercourse by married persons is a sin unless it is validated
by the willingness to beget a child. except to the poorest and most
ignorant the means of preventing conception are available to all. there
is no longer any compulsion to regard the sexual life as within the
jurisdiction of the commissioners of the lord.

religious teachers knew long ago what modern psychologists have
somewhat excitedly rediscovered: that there is a very intimate
connection between the sexual life and the religious life. only men
living in a time when religion has lost so much of its inward vitality
could be shocked at this simple truth, for the churches, when their
inspiration was fresh, have always known it. that is why they have
laid such tremendous emphasis upon the religious control of sexual
experience, have extolled chastity, have preached continence after
marriage except where parenthood was in view, have inveighed against
fornication, adultery, divorce, and all unprocreative indulgence, have
insisted that marriages be celebrated within the communion, have upheld
the parental authority over children. they were not prudish. that is
a state of mind which marks the decay of vigorous determination to
control the sexual life. the early teachers did not avert their eyes.
they did not mince their words. for they knew what they were doing.
[p090]

men like st. paul and st. augustine knew in the most direct way what
sexual desire can do to distract the religious life; how if it is not
sternly regulated, and if it is allowed to run wild, it intoxicates
the whole personality to the exclusion of spiritual interests. they
knew, too, although perhaps not quite so explicitly, that these same
passions, if they are repressed and redirected, may come forth as
an ecstasy of religious devotion. they were not reformers. they did
not think of progress. they did not suppose that the animal in man
could somehow be refined until it was no longer animal. when paul
spoke of the law of his members warring against the law of his mind,
and bringing him into captivity to the law of sin, he had made a
realistic observation which any candid person can verify out of his own
experience. there was no vague finical nonsense about this war of the
members against the inward man seeking delight in the law of god.

if the sexual impulse were not deeply related to the religious life,
the preoccupation of churchmen with it throughout the ages would be
absurd. they have not been preoccupied in any comparable degree with
the other physiological functions of the body. they have concerned
themselves somewhat with eating and drinking, for gluttony and
drunkenness can also distract men from religion. but hunger and thirst
are minor passions, far more easily satisfied than lust, and in no way
so pervasive and imperious. the world, the flesh, and the devil may
usually be taken to mean sexual desire. around it, then, the churches
have built up a ritual, to dominate it lest they be dominated by it.
tenaciously and with good reason they have fought against surrendering
their authority. [p091]

with equally great insight they have kept the closest possible
association with family life especially during the childhood of
the offspring. here again they anticipated by many long ages the
discoveries of modern psychologists. they have always known that it is
in the earliest years, before puberty, that tradition is transmitted.
much is learned after puberty, but in childhood education is more than
mere learning. there education is the growth of the disposition, the
fixing of the prejudices to which all later experience is cumulative.
in childhood men acquire the forms of their seeing, the prototypes of
their feeling, the style of their character. there presumably the very
pattern of authority itself is implanted by habit, fitted to the model
presented by the child’s parents. there the assumption is fixed that
there are wiser and stronger beings whom, in the nature of things, one
must obey. there the need to obey is fixed. there the whole drift of
experience is such as to make credible the idea that above the child
there is the father, above the father a king and the wise men, above
them all a heavenly father and king.

it is plain that any change which disturbs the constitution of the home
will tend profoundly to alter the child’s sense of what he may expect
the constitution of the universe to be. there are many disturbing
changes of which none is more important surely than the emancipation
of women. the god of popular religion has usually been an elderly
male. there have been some female divinities worshipped in different
parts of the world as there have been matriarchal societies. but by
and large the imagination of men has conceived god as a father. they
have magnified to a cosmic scale what they [p092] had seen at home.
it was the male who created the child. it was his seed that the mother
cherished in her womb. it was the male who provided for the needs of
the family, even if the woman did the hard work. it was the male who
fended off enemies. it was the male who laid down the law. it was
the name of the male parent which was preserved and passed on from
generation to generation. everything conspired to fix the belief that
the true order of life was a hierarchy with a man at the apex.

this general notion becomes less and less credible as women assert
themselves. the child of the modern household is soon made to see that
there are at least two persons who can give him orders, and that they
do not always give him the same ones. this does not educate him to
believe that there is one certain guide to conduct in the universe.
there are likely to be two guides to conduct in his universe, as women
insist that they are independent personalities with minds of their
own. this insistence, moreover, tends rather to disarrange the notion
that the father is the creator of the child. an observant youngster,
especially in these days of frank talk about sex, soon becomes aware of
the fact that the role of the male in procreation is a relatively minor
one. but most disturbing of all is the very modern household in which
the woman earns her own living. for here the child is deprived of the
opportunity, which is so conducive to belief in authority, of seeing
daily that even his mother is dependent upon a greater person for the
good things in life.

although women, by and large, are by no means able to earn as much
money as men, the fact which counts is that they can earn enough to
support themselves. they [p093] may not actually support themselves.
but the knowledge that they could, as it becomes an accepted idea in
society, has revolutionary consequences. in former times the woman was
dependent upon her husband for bed, board, shelter, and clothing. her
whole existence was determined by her mating; her sexual experience was
an integral part of her livelihood and her social position. but once it
had become established that a woman could live without a husband, the
intimate connection between her sex and her career began to dissolve.

the invention of dependable methods of preventing conception has
carried this dissolution much further. birth control has separated the
sexual act from the whole series of social consequences which were
once probable if not inevitable. for with the discovery that children
need be born only when they are wanted, the sexual experience has
become increasingly a personal and private affair. it was once an
institutional affair—for the woman. for the man, from time immemorial,
there have been two sorts of sexual experience—one which had no public
consequences, and one which entailed the responsibilities of a family.
the effect of the modern changes, particularly of woman’s economic
independence and of birth control, is to equalize the freedom and the
obligations of men and women.

that the sexual life has become separated from parenthood and that
therefore it is no longer subject to external regulation, is evident.
while the desires of men and women for each other were links in a chain
which included the family and the household and children, authority,
and by that token religious authority, could hope to fix the sexual
[p094] ideal. when the chain broke, and love had no consequences
which were not too subtle for the outsider to measure, the ideal of
love was fixed not by the church in the name of god, but by prudence,
convention, the prevailing rules of hygiene, by taste, circumstances,
and personal sensibility.


3. _art_


_(a) the disappearance of religious painting_

to walk through a museum of western european art is to behold a
peculiarly vivid record of how the great themes of popular religion
have ceased to inspire the imagination of modern men. one can visualize
there the whole story of the dissolution of the ancestral order and
of our present bewilderment. one can see how toward the close of
the fifteenth century the great themes illustrating the reign of a
heavenly king and of the drama of man’s salvation had ceased to be
naively believed; how at the close of the next century which witnessed
the reformation and the counter-reformation, the beginnings of modern
science, the growth of cities, and the rise of capitalism, religious
painting ceased to be the concern of the best painters; and finally
how in the last hundred years painters have illustrated by feverish
experimentation the modern man’s effort to find an adequate substitute
for the organizing principle of the religion which he has lost.

it has been said by way of explanation that painters must sell their
work, and they must, therefore, paint what the rich and powerful
will buy. thus it is pointed out that in the middle ages they worked
under the patronage of the church; in the renaissance their patrons
were paganized [p095] princes and popes, and artists made pictures
which, even when the theme was religious, were no longer christian in
spirit. later in the north of europe the bourgeoisie acquired money and
station, and the dutch painters did their portraits, and made faithful
representations of their kitchens and their parlors. a little later
french painters at the court of versailles made pictures for courtiers,
and in our time john sargent painted the wives of millionaires. to say
all this is to say that the ruling classes in the modern world are no
longer interested in pictures which illustrate or are inspired by the
religion they profess.

this attempt at an explanation in terms of supply and demand may or
may not be sound for the ordinary run of painters. it leaves out of
account, however, those very painters who are the most significant
and interesting. it leaves out of account the painters who, by heroic
refusal to supply the existing market, deserve universal respect, and
in many cases have won an ultimate public vindication. these men do not
fit into the theory of supply and demand, for they endured poverty and
derision in order to paint what they most wanted to paint. they are not
of the tribe, which mr. walter pach calls ananias, who betray the truth
that is in them. but for that truth they did not draw upon the themes
nor the sense of life which almost all of them must have been taught
when they were children. they did not paint religious pictures. they
painted landscapes, streets, interiors, still life, heads, persons,
nudes. whatever else they perceived and tried to express, they did
not see their objects in the perspective of human destiny and divine
government. there is no reason, then, to say that religious painting,
even in the [p096] broadest sense of the term, has disappeared because
there is no effective demand for it. obviously it has disappeared
because the will to produce it has disappeared.


_(b) the loss of a heritage_

in setting the religious tradition aside as something with which they
are not concerned when they are at work, artists are merely behaving
like modern men. it is plain that the religious tradition has become
progressively less relevant to anyone who as painter or sculptor is
engaged in making images. this is a direct result of that increasing
sophistication of religious thought which was signalized in europe
by the iconoclasm of the protestant reformers and the puritanism of
the catholic counter-reformation. before the acids of modernity had
begun to dissolve the organic reality of the ancient faith, there was
no difficulty about picturing god the father as a patriarch and the
virgin mary as a young blonde tuscan mother. there was no disposition
to disbelieve, and so the imagination was at once nourished by a great
heritage of ideas and yet free to elaborate it. but when the authority
of the old beliefs was challenged, a great literature of controversy
and definition was let loose upon the world. and from the point of
view of the artist the chief effect of this effort to argue and to
state exactly, to defend and to rebut, was to substitute concepts for
pictorial ideas. when the nature of god became a matter of definition,
it was obviously crude and illiterate to represent him as a benign
old man. thus the more the theologians refined the dogmas of their
religion the more impossible they made it for painters to express its
significance. no painter who ever lived could [p097] make a picture
which expressed the religion of the rev. harry emerson fosdick. there
is nothing there which the visual imagination can use.

painters have, therefore, a rather better reason than most men for
having turned their backs upon the religious tradition. they can say
with a clear conscience that the contemporary churches have removed
from that tradition those very qualities which once made it an
inexhaustible source of artistic inspiration. they need only point to
modern religious writing in their own support: at its best it has the
qualities of an impassioned argument and more often it is intolerably
flat and vague because in our intellectual climate skepticism dissolves
the concreteness of the imagery and leaves behind sonorous adjectives
and opaque nouns.

the full effects of this separation of the artist from the ancient
traditions of christendom have been felt only in the last two or three
generations. it is no doubt true that the modern disbelief had its
beginnings many generations ago, perhaps in the fifteenth century, but
the momentum of the ancient faith was so great that it took a long
time, even after corrosive doubt had started, before its influence came
to an end. the artists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries may
not have been devout, but they lived in a society in which the forms of
the old order, the hierarchy of classes, the sense of authority, and
the general fund of ideas about human destiny, still had vast prestige.
but in the nineteenth century that old order was almost completely
dissolved and the prestige of its ideas destroyed. the artist of the
last two or three generations has confronted the world without any
accepted understanding [p098] of human life. he has had to improvise
his own understanding of life. that is a new thing in the experience of
artists.


_(c) the artist formerly_

in 787 the second council of nicæa laid down the rule which for nearly
five hundred years was binding upon the artists of christendom:

  the substance of religious scenes is not left to the initiative
  of the artists: it derives from the principles laid down by the
  catholic church and religious tradition.... his art alone belongs
  to the painter, its organization and arrangement belong to the
  clergy.

this was a reasonable rule, since the church and not the individual was
held to be the guardian of those sacred truths upon which depended the
salvation of souls and the safety of society. the notion had occurred
to nobody that the artist was divinely inspired and knew more than
the doctors of the church. therefore, the artist was given careful
specifications as to what he was to represent.

thus when the church of st. urban of troyes decided to order a set of
tapestries illustrating the story of st. valerian and of his wife, st.
cecilia, a learned priest was deputed to draw up the contract for the
artist. in it he wrote among other specifications that: “there shall be
portrayed a place and a tabernacle in the manner of a beautiful room,
in which there shall be st. cecilia, humbly on her knees with her hands
joined, praying to god. and beside her shall be valerian expressing
great admiration and watching an angel which, being above their heads,
should be holding two crowns made of lilies and of roses, [p099] which
he will be placing the one on the head of st. cecilia and the other on
the head of valerian, her husband....”

the rest, one might suppose, was left to the artist’s imagination.
but it was not. having been given his subject matter and his theme,
he was bound further by strict conventions as to how sacred subjects
were to be depicted. jesus on the cross had to be shown with his mother
on the right and st. john on the left. the centurion pierced his left
side. his nimbus contained a cross, as the mark of divinity, whereas
the saints had the nimbus without a cross. only god, the angels,
jesus christ, and the apostles could be represented with bare feet;
it was heretical to depict the virgin or the saints with bare feet.
the purpose of these conventions was to help the spectator identify
the figures in the picture. thus st. peter was given a short beard
and a tonsure; st. paul was bald and had a long beard. it is possible
that these conventions, which were immensely intricate, were actually
codified in manuals which were passed on from master to apprentice in
the workshops.

as a general rule the ecclesiastics who drew up specifications did not
invent the themes. thus the learned priest who drafted the contract for
the tapestry of st. cecilia drew his material from the encyclopedia
of vincent de beauvais. this was a compendium of universal knowledge
covering the whole of history from creation to the last judgment. it
was a source book to which any man could turn in order to find the
truth he happened to need. it contained all of human knowledge and the
answer to all human problems. by the thirteenth century there were a
number of these encyclopedias, of which the greatest was [p100] the
_summa_ of st. thomas aquinas. from these books churchmen took the
themes which they employed their artists to embellish. the artist
himself had no concern as to what he would paint, nor even as to how
he would paint it. that was given, and his energies could be employed
without the travail of intellectual invention, upon the task of
expressing a clear conception in well-established forms.

it must not be supposed, of course, that either doctrines, lore, or
symbolism were uniformly standardized and exactly enforced. in an age
of faith, contradictions and discrepancies are not evident; they are
merely variations on the same theme. thus, while it may be true that
enthusiastic mediævalists like m. mâle have exaggerated the order
and symmetry of the mediæval tradition, they are right, surely, on
the main point, which is that the organic character of the popular
religion provided a consensus of feeling about human destiny which,
in conjunction with the resources of the popular lore, sustained and
organized the imagination of mediæval artists. because religious faith
was simple and genuine, it could absorb and master almost anything.
thus the clergy ruled the artists with a relatively light hand, and
they were not disturbed if, in illuminating the pages of a book of
hours, the artist adorned the margins with a picture of bacchus or the
love of pyramus and thisbe.

it was only when the clergy had been made self-conscious by the
controversies which raged around the reformation that they began in any
strict and literally-minded modern sense to enforce the rule laid down
at nicæa in 787. at the council of trent in 1563 the great liberty of
the artist within the christian tradition came to an end: [p101]

  the holy council forbids the placing in a church of any image
  which calls to mind an erroneous dogma which might mislead the
  simple-minded. it desires that all impurity be avoided, that
  provocative qualities be not given to images. in order to insure
  respect for its decisions, the holy council forbids anyone to place
  or to have placed anywhere, and even in churches which are not open
  to the public, any unusual image unless the bishop has approved it.

in theory this decree at trent is not far removed from the decree at
nicæa nearly one thousand years earlier. but in fact it is a whole
world removed from it. for the dogmas at nicæa rested upon naive faith
and the dogmas at trent rested upon definition. the outcome showed the
difference, for within a generation catholic scholars made a critical
survey of the lore which mediæval art had employed, and on grounds of
taste, doctrine, and the like, condemned the greater part of it. after
that, as m. mâle says, there might still be artists who were christians
but there was no longer a christian art.


_(d) the artist as prophet_

whether the necessity of creating his own tradition is a good or a bad
thing for the artist, there can be no doubt that it is a novel thing
and a burdensome one. artists have responded to it by proclaiming one
of two theories: they have said that the artist, being a genius, was a
prophet; when they did not say that, they said that religion, morality,
and philosophy were irrelevant, and that art should be practiced for
art’s sake. both theories are obviously attempts to find some personal
substitute for those traditions upon which artists in all other ages
have been dependent. [p102]

the theory of the artist as prophet has this serious defect: there
is practically no evidence to support it. why should there be? what
connection is there between the capacity to make beautiful objects and
the capacity to discover truth? surely experience shows that it is
something of a marvel when a great artist appears who, like leonardo
or goethe, is also an original and important thinker. indeed, it is
reasonable to ask whether the analysis and abstraction which thinking
involves are not radically different psychological processes from
the painter’s passionate appreciation of the appearance of things.
certainly to think as physicists think is to strip objects of all
their secondary characters, not alone of their emotional significance,
but of their color, their texture, their fragrance, and even of their
superficial forms. the world as we know it through our senses has
completely disappeared before the physicist begins to think about
it. and in its place there is a collection of concepts which have no
pictorial value whatsoever. these concepts are by definition incapable
of being visualized, and when as a concession to human weakness, his
own or his pupil’s, the scientist constructs a mechanical model to
illustrate an idea, this model is at best a crude analogy, and in no
real sense the portrait of that idea.

thus when shelley made earth say:

  i spin beneath my pyramid of night,
  which points into the heavens ...

he borrowed an image from astronomy. but this image, which is, i think,
superb poetry, radically alters the original scientific idea, for
it introduces into a realm of purely [p103] physical relations the
notion of a gigantic spectator with a vastly magnified human eye. there
are, no doubt, many other concepts in science which, if poets knew
more science, would lend themselves to translation into equally noble
images. but these images would not state the scientific truth.

the current belief that artists are prophets is an inheritance from
the time when science had no critical method of its own, and poets,
being reflective persons, had at least as good a chance as anyone
else of stumbling upon truths which were subsequently verified. it is
due in some measure also to the human tendency to remember the happy
guesses of poets and to forget their unhappy ones, a tendency which
has gone far to sustain the reputations of fortune-tellers, oracles,
and stockbrokers. but above all, the reputation of the artist as one
who must have wisdom is sustained by a rather genial fallacy: he finds
expression for the feelings of the spectator, and the spectator rather
quickly assumes that the artist has found an explanation for the world.

yet unless i am greatly mistaken the modern painter has ceased not
only to depict any theory of destiny but has ceased to express any
important human mood in the presence of destiny. one goes to a museum
and comes out feeling that one has beheld an odd assortment of nude
bodies, copper kettles, oranges, tomatoes, and zinnias, babies, street
corners, apple trees, bathing beaches, bankers, and fashionable ladies.
i do not say that this person or that may not find a picture immensely
significant to him. but the general impression for anyone, i think, is
of a chaos of anecdotes, perceptions, fantasies, and little [p104]
commentaries, which may be all very well in their way, but are not
sustaining and could readily be dispensed with.

the conclusive answer to the romantic theory of the artist as prophet
is a visit to a collection of modern paintings.


_(e) art for art’s sake_

this brings us to the other theory, which is that art has nothing to do
with prophecy, wisdom, and the meaning of life, but has to do only with
art. this theory must command an altogether different kind of respect
than the sentimental theory of the artist as prophet. this indeed is
the theory which most artists now hold. “i am convinced,” says mr. r.
h. wilenski in his book _the modern movement in art_, “that all the
most intelligent artists of western europe in recent centuries have
been tormented by this search for a justification of their work and a
criterion of its value; and that almost all such artists have attempted
to solve the problem by some consciously-held idea of art; or in other
words that in place of art justified by service to a religion they have
sought to evolve an art justified by service to an idea of art itself.”

the instinct of artists in this matter is, i think, much sounder than
the rationalizations which they have constructed. as working artists
they do not think of themselves as seers, philosophers, or moralists.
they do not wish to be judged as thinkers, but as painters, and they
are justifiably impatient with the philistines who are interested
primarily in the subject matter and its human significance. the painter
knows quite well that in the [p105] broadly human sense he has no
special qualifications as story-teller or wise man. what he is driving
at, therefore, in his expression of contempt for the subject matter of
art is the wish that he might again be in the position of the mediæval
artist who did not have to concern himself _as artist_ with the
significance of his themes. the intuition behind the theory of art for
art’s sake is the artist’s wish to be free of a responsibility which
he has never before had put upon him. the peculiar circumstances of
modernity have thrust upon him, much against his will and regardless of
his aptitudes, the intolerably heavy burden of doing for himself what
in other ages was done for him by tradition and authority.

the philosophy which he has invented is an attempt to prove that
no philosophy is necessary. carried to its conclusion, this theory
eventuates in the belief that painting must become an arrangement of
forms and colors which have no human connotation whatsoever for the
artist or the spectator. these arrangements represent nothing in the
real world. they signify nothing. they are an esthetic artifice in the
same sense that the more esoteric geometries are logical artifices.
this much can at least be said of them: they are a consistent effort
to practice the arts in a world where there is no human tradition upon
which the representative arts can draw.

this absolute estheticism is not, however, art without philosophy. some
sort of philosophy is implied in all human activity. the artist who
says that it is delightful above all other things to realize the pure
form of objects, regardless of whether this object is a saint, a lovely
woman, or a dish of fruit, has made a very important [p106] statement
about life. he has said that the ordinary meanings which men attach
to objects are of no consequence, that their order of moral values is
ultimately a delusion, that all facts are equally good and equally bad,
and that to contemplate anything, it does not matter what, under the
aspect of its esthetic form, is to realize all that the artist can give.

this, too, is a philosophy and a very radical philosophy at that. it
is in fact just the philosophy which men were bound to construct for
themselves in an age when the traditional theory of the purpose of life
had lost its meaning for them. for they are saying that experience
has no meaning beyond that which each man can find in the intense
realization of each passing moment. he must fail, they would feel, if
he attempts to connect these passing moments into a coherent story
of his whole experience, let alone the whole experience of the human
race. for experience has no underlying significance, man himself has
no station in the universe, and the universe has no plan which is more
than a drift of circumstances, illuminated here and there by flashes of
self-consciousness.


_(f) the burden of originality_

as a matter of fact this doctrine is merely the esthetic version of the
rather crude mechanistic materialism which our grandfathers thought
was the final conclusion of science. the connection is made evident in
the famous “_conclusions_” to “_the renaissance_” which walter pater
wrote in 1868, and then omitted from the second edition because “it
might possibly mislead some of those young men into whose hands it
might fall.” in this [p107] essay there was the startling, though
it is now hackneyed, assertion that “to burn always with this hard,
gem-like flame, to maintain this ecstasy, is success in life,” and
that “of this wisdom, the poetic passion, the desire of beauty, the
love of art for art’s sake, has most; for art comes to you professing
frankly to give nothing but the highest quality to your moments as they
pass, and simply for those moments’ sake.” what is never quoted, and
is apparently forgotten, is the reasoning by which pater arrived at
the conclusion that momentary ecstasy is the end and aim of life. it
is, if we turn back a few pages, that scientific analysis has reduced
everything to a mere swarm of whirling atoms, upon which consciousness
discerns impressions that are “unstable, flickering, inconsistent.” it
was out of this misunderstanding of the nature of scientific concepts
that pater developed his theory of art for the moment’s sake.

i dwell upon this only in order to show that what appeared to be an
estheticism divorced from all human concern was really a somewhat
casual by-product of a fashionable misunderstanding at the time
pater was writing. we should find that to-day equally far-reaching
conclusions are arrived at by half-understood popularizations of
bergson or freud. i venture to believe that any theory of art is
inevitably implicated in some philosophy of life, and that the only
question is whether the artist is conscious or unconscious of the
theory he is acting upon. for unless the artist deals with purely
logical essences, provided he observes and perceives anything in
the outer world, no matter how he represents it or symbolizes it or
comments upon it, there must be implicit in it some attitude [p108]
toward the meaning of existence. if his conclusion is that human
existence has no meaning, that, too, is an attitude toward the meaning
of existence. the mediæval artist worked on much less tangled premises.
he painted pictures which illustrated the great hopes and fears of
christendom. but he did not himself attempt to formulate those hopes
and fears. he accepted them more or less ready made, understanding
them and believing in them because, as a child of his age, they were
his hopes and fears. but because they existed and were there for
him to work upon, he could put his whole energy into realizing them
passionately. the modern artist would like to have the same freedom
from preoccupation, but he cannot have it. he has first to decide what
it is that he shall passionately realize.

in effect the mediæval artist was reproducing a story that had often
been told before. but the modern artist has to undergo a whole
preliminary labor of inventing, creating, formulating, for which there
was almost no counterpart in the life of a mediæval artist. the modern
artist has to be original. that is to say, he has to seize experience,
pick it over, and drag from it his theme. it is a very exhausting task,
as anyone can testify who has tried it.

that surely is why we hear so much of the storm and stress in the soul
of a modern artist. the craftsman does not go through agonies over the
choice of words, images, and rhythms. the agony of the modern artist
lies in the effort to give birth to the idea, to bring some intuition
of order out of the chaos of experience, to create the idea with which
his art can deal. we assume, [p109] quite falsely i think, that this
act of ‘creation’ is an inherent part of the artist’s task. but if we
refrain from using words loosely, and reserve the word creation to
mean the finding of the original intuition and idea, then creation is
plainly not a necessary part of the artist’s equipment. creation is
an obligation which the artist has had thrust upon him as a result of
the dissolution of the great accepted themes. he is compelled to be
creative because his world is chaotic.

this labor of creation has no connection with his gifts as a painter.
there is no more reason why a painter should be able to extemporize
a satisfactory interpretation of life than that he should be able to
govern a city or write a treatise on chemistry. giotto surely was as
profoundly original a painter as the world is likely to see; it has
been said of him by mr. berenson, who has full title to speak, that he
had “a thoroughgoing sense for the significant in the visible world.”
but with all his genius, what would have been giotto’s plight if,
in addition to exercising his sense of the significant, he had had
to create for himself all his standards of significance? for giotto
those standards existed in the catholic christianity of the thirteenth
century, and it was by the measure of these standards, within the
framework of a great accepted tradition, that he followed his own
personal sense of the significant. but the modern artist, though he had
giotto’s gifts, would not have giotto’s freedom to use them. a very
large part of his energies, consciously or unconsciously, would have
to be spent in devising some sort of substitute for the traditional
view of life which giotto took for granted. for there is no longer an
accepted view of [p110] life organized in stories which all men know
and understand.

there is instead a profusion of creeds and philosophies, fads and
intellectual experiments among which the modern painter, like every
other modern man, finds himself trying to choose a philosophy of
life. everybody is somewhat dithered by these choices: the business
of being a shavian one year, a nietzschean the next, a bergsonian
the third, then of being a patriot for the duration of the war, and
after that a freudian, is not conducive to the serene exercise of a
painter’s talents. for these various philosophies which the artist
picks up here and there, or by which he is oftener than not picked
up and carried along, are immensely in dispute. they are not clear.
they are rather personal and somewhat accidental visions of the world.
they are essentially unpictorial because they originate in science and
are incompleted, abstracted teachings for the meaning of things. as a
result the art in which they are implicit is often uninteresting, and
usually unintelligible, to those who do not happen to belong to the
same cult.

the painter can hardly expect to invent for himself a view of life
which will bring order out of the chaos of modernity. yet he is
compelled to try, for he is engaged in setting down a vision of the
world, and every vision of the world implies some sort of philosophy.
the effects of the modern emancipation are more clearly evident in the
history of painting during the last hundred years than in almost any
other activity, because in the galleries hang in frames the successive
attempts of men, who are deeply immersed in the modern scene, to set
down their [p111] statements about life. mr. wilenski, who is an
astute and well-informed critic, has estimated that during the last
hundred years in paris a new movement in painting has been inaugurated
every ten years. that would correspond fairly accurately to the birth
and death of new philosophies in the advanced and most emancipated
circles.

what was happening to painting is precisely what has happened to all
the other separated activities of men. each activity has its own ideal,
indeed a succession of ideals, for with the dissolution of the supreme
ideal of service to god, there is no ideal which unites them all, and
sets them in order. each ideal is supreme within a sphere of its own.
there is no point of reference outside which can determine the relative
value of competing ideals. the modern man desires health, he desires
money, he desires power, beauty, love, truth, but which he shall desire
the most since he cannot pursue them all to their logical conclusions,
he no longer has any means of deciding. his impulses are no longer
parts of one attitude toward life; his ideals are no longer in a
hierarchy under one lordly ideal. they have become differentiated. they
are free and they are incommensurable.

the religious synthesis has dissolved. the modern man no longer holds a
belief about the universe which sustains a pervasive emotion about his
destiny; he no longer believes genuinely in any idea which organizes
his interests within the framework of a cosmic order.




chapter vii [p112]

the drama of destiny


1. _the soul in the modern world_

the effect of modernity, then, is to specialize and thus to intensify
our separated activities. once all things were phases of a single
destiny: the church, the state, the family, the school were means to
the same end; the rights and duties of the individual in society, the
rules of morality, the themes of art, and the teachings of science
were all of them ways of revealing, of celebrating, of applying the
laws laid down in the divine constitution of the universe. in the
modern world institutions are more or less independent, each serving
its own proximate purpose, and our culture is really a collection of
separate interests each sovereign within its own realm. we do not put
shrines in our workshops, and we think it unseemly to talk business
in the vestibule of a church. we dislike politics in the pulpit and
preaching from politicians. we do not look upon our scholars as priests
or upon our priests as learned men. we do not expect science to sustain
theology, nor religion to dominate art. on the contrary we insist with
much fervor on the separation of church and state, of religion and
science, of politics and historical research, of morality and art, of
business and love. this separation of activities has its counterpart
in a separation of selves; the life of a modern man is not so much
the [p113] history of a single soul; it is rather a play of many
characters within a single body.

that may be why the modern autobiographical novel usually runs to two
volumes; the author requires more space to explain how his various
personalities came to be what they were at each little crisis of
adolescence and of middle age than st. augustine, st. thomas à kempis,
and st. francis put together needed in order to describe their whole
destiny in this world and the next. no doubt we are rather long-winded
and tiresome about the complexities of our souls. but from the
knowledge that we are complex there is no escape.

the modern man is unable any longer to think of himself as a single
personality approaching an everlasting judgment. he is one man to-day
and another to-morrow, one person here and another there. he does not
feel he knows himself. he is sure that no one else knows him at all.
his motives are intricate, and not wholly what they seem. he is moved
by impulses which he feels but cannot describe. there are dark depths
in his nature which no one has ever explored. there are splendors which
are unreleased. he has become greatly interested in his moods. the
precise nuances of his likes and dislikes have become very important.
there is no telling just what he is or what he may become, but there
is a certain breathless interest in having one of his selves watch and
comment upon the mischief and the frustrations of his other selves.
the problems of his character have become dissociated from any feeling
that they involve his immortal destiny. they have become dissociated
from the feeling that they deeply matter. from the feeling that [p114]
they are deeply his own. from the feeling that there is any personality
to own them. there they are: his inferiority complex and mine, your
sadistic impulse and tom jones’s, anna’s father fixation, and little
willie’s pyromania.

the thoroughly modern man has really ceased to believe that there is
an immortal essence presiding like a king over his appetites. the
word ‘soul’ has become a figure of speech, which he uses loosely,
sometimes to mean his tenderer aspirations, sometimes to mean the
whole collection of his impulses, sometimes, when he is in a hurry,
to mean nothing at all. it is certainly not the fashion any longer to
think of the soul as a little lord ruling the turbulent rabble of his
carnal passions; the constitutional form in popular psychology to-day
is republican. each impulse may invoke the bill of rights, and have
its way if the others will let it. as bertrand russell has put it: “a
single desire is no better and no worse, considered in isolation, than
any other; but a group of desires is better than another group if all
of the first group can be satisfied, while in the second group some are
inconsistent with others,” but since, unhappily as is usually the case,
desires are extremely inconsistent, the uttermost that the modern man
can say is that the victory must go to the strongest desires. morality
thus becomes a traffic code designed to keep as many desires as
possible moving together without too many violent collisions. when men
insist that morality is more than that, they are quickly denounced, in
general correctly, as meddlesome matties, as enemies of human liberty,
or as schemers trying to get the better of their fellow men. morality,
conceived as a discipline [p115] to fit men for heaven, is resented;
morality, conceived as a discipline for happiness, is understood by
very few. the objective moral certitudes have dissolved, and in the
liberal philosophy there is nothing to take their place.


2. _the great scenario_

the modern world is like a stage on which a stupendous play has just
been presented. many who were in the audience are still spellbound,
and as they pass out into the street, the scenario of the drama still
seems to them the very clue and plan of life. in the prologue the earth
was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep.
then at the command of god the sun, the moon, the stars, the earth, its
plants and its animals, then man, and after him woman, were created.
and in the epilogue the blessed were living in the new jerusalem, a
city of pure gold like clear glass, with walls laid on foundations of
precious stones. between the darkness that preceded creation and the
glory of this heavenly city which had no need of the sun, a plot was
unfolded which constitutes the history of mankind. in the beginning man
was perfect. but the devil tempted him to eat the forbidden fruit, and
as a punishment god banished him from paradise, and laid upon him and
his descendants the curse of labor and of death.

but in meting out this punishment, god in his mercy promised ultimately
to redeem the children of adam. from among them he chose one tribe who
were to be the custodians of this promise. and then in due time he
sent his son, born of a virgin, to teach the gospel of salvation, and
to expiate the sin of adam upon a cross. [p116] those who believed
in this gospel and followed its commandments, would at the final day
of reckoning enter into the heavenly jerusalem; the rest would be
consigned to the devil and his everlasting torments.

into this marvelous story the whole of human history and of human
knowledge could be fitted, and only in accordance with it could they
be understood. this was the key to existence, the answer to doubt,
the solace for pain, and the guarantee of happiness. but to many who
were in the audience it is now evident that they have seen a play, a
magnificent play, one of the most sublime ever created by the human
imagination, but nevertheless a play, and not a literal account of
human destiny. they know it was a play. they have lingered long enough
to see the scene shifters at work. the painted drop is half rolled
up; some of the turrets of the celestial city can still be seen, and
part of the choir of angels. but behind them, plainly visible, are the
struts and gears which held in place what under a gentler light looked
like the boundaries of the universe. they are only human fears and
human hopes, and bits of antique science and half-forgotten history,
and symbols here and there of experiences through which some in each
generation pass.

conceivably men might once again imagine another drama which was as
great as the epic of the christian bible. but like _paradise lost_
or _faust_, it would remain a work of the imagination. while the
intellectual climate in which we live is what it is, while we continue
to be as conscious as we are of how our own minds work, we could not
again accept naively such a gorgeous fable of our destiny. yet only
five hundred years ago the whole [p117] of christendom believed that
this story was literally and objectively true. god was not another
name for the evolutionary process, or for the sum total of the laws of
nature, or for a compendium of all noble things, as he is in modernist
accounts of him; he was the ruler of the universe, an omnipotent,
magical king, who felt, who thought, who remembered and issued his
commands. and because there was such a god, whose plan was clearly
revealed in all its essentials, human life had a definite meaning,
morality had a certain foundation, men felt themselves to be living
within the framework of a universe which they called divine because it
corresponded with their deepest desires.

if we ask ourselves why it is impossible for us to sum up the meaning
of existence in a great personal drama, we have to begin by remembering
that every great story of this kind must assume that the universe
is governed by forces which are essentially of the same order as
the promptings of the human heart. otherwise it would not greatly
interest us. a story, however plausible, about beings who had no human
qualities, a plot which unfolded itself as utterly indifferent to our
own personal fate, would not serve as a substitute for the christian
epic. this is the trouble with the so-called religion of creative
evolution: even if it is true, which is far from certain, it is so
profoundly indifferent to our individual fate, that it leaves most men
cold. for there are very few who are so mystical as to be able to sink
themselves wholly in the hidden purposes of an unconscious natural
force. this, too, as the catholic church has always insisted, is the
trouble with pantheistic religion, for if everything is [p118] divine,
then nothing is peculiarly divine, and all the distinctions of good and
evil are meaningless.

the story must not only assume that human ideals inspire the whole
creation, but it must contain guarantees that this is so. there must
be no doubt about it. science must confirm the moral assumptions; the
highest and most certain available knowledge must clinch the conviction
that the story unfolded is the secret of life.


3. _earmarks of truth_

religious teachers who were close to the people have always understood
that they must perform wonders if they were to make their god
convincing and their own title to speak for him valid. the writer of
exodus, for example, was quite clear in his mind about this:

  and moses answered and said, but, behold, they will not believe me,
  nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, the lord hath not
  appeared unto thee.

  and the lord said unto him, what is that in thine hand? and he
  said, a rod.

  and he said, cast it on the ground. and he cast it on the ground,
  and it became a serpent; and moses fled from before it.

  and the lord said unto moses, put forth thine hand, and take it by
  the tail. and he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a
  rod in his hand:

  that they may believe that the lord god of their fathers, the god
  of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob, hath appeared
  unto thee.

even in the wildest flights of his fancy the common man is almost
always primarily interested in the prosaic consequences. if he believes
in fairies he is not likely [p119] to imagine them as spirits
inhabiting a world apart, but as little people who do things which
affect his own affairs. the common man is an unconscious pragmatist:
he believes because he is satisfied that his beliefs change the course
of events. he would not be inspired to worship a god who merely
contemplates the universe, or a god who created it once, and then
rested, while its destiny unfolds itself inexorably. to the plain
people religion is not disinterested speculation but a very practical
matter. it is concerned with their well-being in this world and in an
equally concrete world hereafter. they have wanted to know the will of
god because they had to know it if they were to put themselves right
with the king of creation.

those who professed to know god’s will had to demonstrate that they
knew it. this was the function of miracles. they were tangible evidence
that the religious teacher had a true commission. “then those men, when
they had seen the miracle (of the loaves and the fishes) that jesus
did, said, this is of a truth that prophet that should come into the
world.” when jesus raised the dead man at the gate of the city of nain,
“there came a fear on all: and they glorified god, saying, that a great
prophet is risen up among us; and, that god hath visited his people.”
the most authoritative catholic theologians teach that miracles “are
not wrought to show the internal truth of the doctrines, but only to
give _manifest_ reasons why we should accept the doctrines.” they are
“essentially an appeal to knowledge,” demonstrations, one might almost
say divine experiments, by which men are enabled to know the glory and
the providence of god. [p120]

the catholic apologists maintain that god can be known by the exercise
of reason, but the miracle helps, as it were, to clinch the conviction.
the persistent attachment of the catholic church to miracles is
significant. it has a longer unbroken experience with human nature than
any other institution in the western world. it has adapted itself to
many circumstances, and under the profession of an unalterable creed it
has abandoned and then added much. but it has never ceased to insist
upon the need of a physical manifestation of the divine power. for with
an unerring instinct for realities, catholic churchmen have understood
that there is a residuum of prosaic, matter-of-factness, of a need to
touch and to see, which verbal proofs can never quite satisfy. they
have resolutely responded to that need. they have not preached god
merely by praising him; they have brought god near to men by revealing
him to the senses, as one who is great enough and good enough and
sufficiently interested in them to heal the sick and to make the floods
recede.

but to-day scientists are ever so much superior to churchmen at this
kind of demonstration. the miracles which are recounted from the pulpit
were, after all, few and far between. there are even theologians who
teach that miracles ceased with the death of the apostles. but the
miracles of science seem to be inexhaustible. it is not surprising,
then, that men of science should have acquired much of the intellectual
authority which churchmen once exercised. scientists do not, of course,
speak of their discoveries as miracles. but to the common man they have
much the same character as miracles. they are [p121] wonderful, they
are inexplicable, they are manifestations of a great power over the
forces of nature.

it cannot be said, i think, that the people at large, even the
moderately educated minority, understand the difference between
scientific method and revelation, or that they have decided upon
reflection to trust science. there is at least as much mystery in
science for the common man as there ever was in religion; in a sense
there is more mystery, for the logic of science is still altogether
beyond his understanding, whereas the logic of revelation is the logic
of his own feelings. but if men at large do not understand the method
of science, they can appreciate some of its more tangible results.
and these results are so impressive that scientific men are often
embarrassed by the unbounded popular expectations which they have so
unintentionally aroused.

their authority in the realm of knowledge has become virtually
irresistible. and so when scientists teach one theory and the bible
another, the scientists invariably carry the greater conviction.


4. _on reconciling religion and science_

the conflicts between scientists and churchmen are sometimes ascribed
to a misunderstanding on both sides. but when we examine the proposals
for peace, it is plain, i think, that they are in effect proposals
for a truce. there is, for example, the suggestion first put out, i
believe, in the seventeenth century that god made the universe like
a clock, and that having started it running he will let it alone
till it runs down. by this ingenious metaphor, which can neither be
proved nor disproved, [p122] it was possible to reconcile for a time
the scientific notion of natural law with the older notion of god as
creator and as judge. the religious conception was held to be true for
the beginning of the world and for the end, the scientific conception
was true in between. later, when the theatre of the difficulty was
transferred from physics and astronomy to biology and history, a
variation was propounded. god, it was said, created the world and
governs it; the way he creates and governs is the way described by
scientists as ‘evolution.’

attempts at reconciliations like these are based on a theory that it
is feasible somewhere in the field of knowledge to draw a line and
say that on one side the methods of science shall prevail, on the
other the methods of traditional religion. it is acknowledged that
where experiment and observation are possible, the field belongs to
the scientists; but it is argued that there is a vast field of great
interest to mankind which is beyond the reach of practical scientific
inquiry, and that here, touching questions like the ultimate destiny
of man, the purpose of life, and immortality, the older method of
revelation, inspired and verified by intuition, is still reliable.

in any truce of this sort there is bound to be aggression from both
sides. for it is a working policy rather than an inwardly accepted
conviction. scientists cannot really believe that there are fields of
possible knowledge which they can never enter. they are bound to enter
all fields and to explore everything. and even if they fail, they
cannot believe that other scientists must always fail. their essays,
moreover, create disturbance and doubt which orthodox churchmen are
forced to resent. for in [p123] any division of authority, there must
be some ultimate authority to settle questions of jurisdiction. shall
scientists determine what belongs to science, or shall churchmen? the
question is insoluble as long as both claim that they have the right to
expound the nature of existence.

and so while the policy of toleration may be temporarily workable, it
is inherently unstable. therefore, among men who are at once devoted
to the method of science and sensitive to the human need of religion,
the hope has arisen that something better can be worked out than a
purely diplomatic division of the mind into spheres of influence. mr.
whitehead, for example, in his book called _science and the modern
world_, argues “there are wider truths and finer perspectives within
which a reconciliation of a deeper religion and a more subtle science
will be found.” he illustrates what he means in this fashion. galileo
said the earth moves and the sun is fixed; the inquisition said the
earth is fixed and the sun moves; the newtonian astronomers said that
both the sun and the earth move. “but now we say that any one of these
three statements is equally true, provided you have fixed your sense of
‘rest’ and ‘motion’ in the way required by the statement adopted. at
the date of galileo’s controversy with the inquisition, galileo’s way
of stating the facts was beyond question the fruitful procedure for the
sake of scientific research. but at that time the concepts of relative
motion were in nobody’s mind; so that the statements were made in
ignorance of the qualifications required for the more perfect truth....
all sides had got hold of important truths.... [p124] but with the
knowledge of those times, the truths appeared to be inconsistent.”

this is reconciliation through a higher synthesis. but i cannot help
feeling that the scientist has here produced the synthesis, and that
the churchmen have merely provided one of the ideas which are to be
synthesized. mr. whitehead argues in effect that a subtler science
would confirm many ideas that were once taken on faith. but he holds
unswervingly to the belief of the scientist that his method contains
the criterion of truth. in his illustration the reconciliation between
galileo, the inquisition, and the newtonian physicists is reached if
all three parties accept “the modern concept of relative motion.”
but the modern concept of relative motion was reached by scientific
thought, and not by apostolic revelation. to mr. whitehead, therefore,
the ultimate arbiter is science, and what he means by reconciliation is
a scientific view of the universe sufficiently wide and sufficiently
subtle to justify many of the important, but hitherto unverified,
claims of traditional religion. mr. whitehead, it happens, is an
englishman as well as a great logician, and it is difficult to resist
the suspicion that he conceives the church of the future as enjoying
the dignities of an indian maharajah, with a resident scientist behind
the altar.

a reconciliation of this kind may soften the conflict for a while.
but it cannot for long disguise the fact that it is based on a denial
of the premises of faith. if the method of science has the last word,
then revelation is reduced from a means of arriving at absolute
certainty to a flash of insight which can be trusted if and when it
is verified by science. under such terms of peace, the religious
[p125] experiences of mankind become merely one of the instruments of
knowledge, like the microscope and the binomial theorem, usable now
and then, but subject to correction, and provisional. they no longer
yield complete, ultimate, invincible truths. they yield an hypothesis.
but the religious life of most men has not, until this day at least,
been founded upon hypotheses which, when accurately stated, included a
coefficient of probable error.


5. _gospels of science_

because its prestige is so great, science has been acclaimed as a new
revelation. cults have attached themselves to scientific hypotheses
as fortune-tellers to a circus. a whole series of pseudo-religions
have been hastily constructed upon such dogmas as the laws of
nature, mechanism, darwinian evolution, lamarckian evolution, and
psychoanalysis. each of these cults has had its own decalogue of
science founded at last, it was said, upon certain knowledge.

these cults are an attempt to fit the working theories of science to
the ordinary man’s desire for personal salvation. they do violence
to the integrity of scientific thought and they cannot satisfy the
layman’s need to believe. for the essence of the scientific method is
a determination to investigate phenomena without conceding anything to
naive human prejudices. therefore, genuine men of science shrink from
the attempts of poets, prophets, and popular lecturers to translate
the current scientific theory into the broad and passionate dogmas
of popular faith. as a matter of common honesty they know that no
theory has the kind of absolute verity which [p126] popular faith
would attribute to it. as a matter of prudence they fear these popular
cults, knowing quite well that freedom of inquiry is endangered when
men become passionately loyal to an idea, and stake their personal
pride and hope of happiness upon its vindication. in the light of human
experience, men of science have learned what happens when investigators
are not free to discard any theory without breaking some dear old
lady’s heart. their theories are not the kind of revelation which the
old lady is seeking, and their beliefs are relative and provisional to
a degree which must seem utterly alien and bewildering to her.

here, for example, is the conclusion of some lectures by one of the
greatest living astronomers. i have italicized the words which the dear
old lady would not be likely to hear in a sermon:

  i have dealt mainly with two salient points—the problem of the
  source of a star’s energy, and the change of mass which must
  occur if there is any evolution of faint stars from bright stars.
  i have shown how these _appear_ to meet in the _hypothesis_ of
  the annihilation of matter. i _do not hold this as a secure
  conclusion_. i _hesitate even to advocate it as probable_, because
  there are many details which seem to me to throw _considerable
  doubt_ on it, and i have formed a strong impression that there
  must be _some essential point which has not yet been grasped_.
  i _simply_ tell it you as the _clue_ which at the moment we are
  _trying_ to follow up—_not knowing whether it is false scent or
  true_. i should have liked to have closed these lectures by leading
  up to some great climax. but perhaps it is more in accordance with
  the true conditions of scientific progress that they should _fizzle
  out_ with a glimpse of the _obscurity_ which marks the frontiers of
  present knowledge. i do not apologize for the [p127] _lameness_ of
  the conclusion, _for it is not a conclusion_. i _wish i could feel
  confident that it is even a beginning_.

this great climax, to which dr. eddington was unable to lead up, is
what the layman is looking for. we know quite well what the nature
of that great climax would be: it would be a statement of fact which
related the destiny of each individual to the destiny of the universe.
that is the kind of truth which is found in revelation. it is the kind
of truth which men would like to find in science. but it is the kind of
truth which science does not afford. the difficulty is deeper than the
provisional character of scientific hypothesis; it is not due merely to
the inability of the scientist to say that his conclusion is absolutely
secure. the layman in search of a dogma upon which to organize his
destiny might be willing to grant that the conclusions of science
to-day are as yet provisional. what he tends to misunderstand is that
even if the conclusions were guaranteed by all investigators now and
for all time to come, those conclusions would still fail to provide him
with a conception of the world of which the great climax was a prophecy
of the fate of creation in terms of his hopes and fears.

the radical novelty of modern science lies precisely in the rejection
of the belief, which is at the heart of all popular religion, that
the forces which move the stars and atoms are contingent upon the
preferences of the human heart. the science of aristotle and of the
schoolmen, on the other hand, was a truly popular science. it was in
its inspiration the instinctive science of the unscientific man. “they
read into the cause and goal of the universe,” as dr. randall has said,
“that which alone [p128] justifies it for man, its service of the
good.” they provided a conception of the universe which was available
for the religious needs of ordinary men, and in the _divine comedy_ we
can see the supreme example of what science must be like if it is to
satisfy the human need to believe. the purpose of the whole poem, said
dante himself, “is to remove those who are living in this life from the
state of wretchedness, and to lead them to the state of blessedness.”
mediæval science, which follows the logic of human desire, was such
that dante could without violence either to its substance or its spirit
say at the summit of paradise:

  to the high fantasy here power failed; but already my desire and
  will were rolled—even as a wheel that moveth equally—by the love
  that moves the sun and the other stars.

this is the great climax which men instinctively expect: the ability
to say with perfect assurance that when the truth is fully evident it
will be seen that their desire and will are rolled by the love that
moves the sun and the other stars. they hope not only to find the will
of god in the universe but to know that his will is fundamentally like
their own. only if they could believe that on the basis of scientific
investigation would they really feel that science had ‘explained’ the
world.

explanation, in this sense, cannot come from modern science because
it is not in this sense that modern science attempts to explain the
universe. it is wholly misleading to say, for example, that the
scientific picture of the world is mechanical. all that can properly
be said is that many scientists have found it satisfying to think
about the universe as if it were built on a mechanical model. “if
i [p129] can make a mechanical model,” said lord kelvin, “i can
understand it. as long as i cannot make a mechanical model all the way
through, i cannot understand it.” but what does the scientist mean by
“understanding it”? he means, says professor bridgman, that he has
“reduced a situation to elements with which we are so familiar that we
accept them as a matter of course, so that our curiosity rests.” modern
men are familiar with machines. they can take them apart and put them
together, so that even though we should all be a little flustered if
we had to tell just what we mean by a machine, our curiosity tends to
be satisfied if we hear that the phenomenon, say, of electricity or of
human behavior, is like a machine.

the place at which curiosity rests is not a fixed point called ‘the
truth.’ the unscientific man, like the schoolmen of the middle ages,
really means by the truth an explanation of the universe in terms of
human desire. what modern science means by the truth has been stated
most clearly perhaps by the late charles s. peirce when he said
that “the opinion which is fated to be ultimately agreed to by all
those who investigate, is what we mean by the truth, and the object
represented in this opinion is the real.” when we say that something
has been ‘explained’ by science, we really mean only that our own
curiosity is satisfied. another man, whose mind was more critical,
who commanded a greater field of experience, might not be satisfied
at all. thus “the savage is satisfied by explaining the thunderstorm
as the capricious act of an angry god.... (but) even if the physicist
believed in the existence of the angry god, he would not be satisfied
with this explanation of the thunderstorm [p130] because he is not so
well acquainted with angry gods as to be able to predict when anger
is followed by a storm. he would have to know why the god had become
angry, and why making a thunderstorm eased his ire.” but even carrying
the explanation to this point would not be carrying it to its limit.
for there is no formal limit. the next scientist might wish to know
what a god was and what anger is. and when he had been told what their
elements are, the next man might be dissatisfied until he had found the
elements of these elements.

the man who says that the world is a machine has really advanced no
further than to say that he is so well satisfied with this analogy that
he is through with searching any further. that is his business, as long
as he does not insist that he has reached a clear and ultimate picture
of the universe. for obviously he has not. a machine is something in
which the parts push and pull each other. but why are they pushing and
pulling, and how do _they_ work? do they push and pull because of the
action of the electrons in their orbits within the atoms? if that is
true, then how does an electron work? is it, too, a machine? or is it
something quite different from a machine? shall we attempt to explain
machines electrically, or shall we attempt to explain electricity
mechanically?

it becomes plain, therefore, that scientific explanation is altogether
unlike the explanations to which the common man is accustomed. it does
not yield a certain picture of anything which can be taken naively as
a representation of reality. and therefore the philosophies which have
grown up about science, like mechanism or [p131] creative evolution,
are in no way guaranteed by science as the account of creation in
genesis is guaranteed by the authority of scripture. they are nothing
but provisional dramatizations which are soon dissolved by the progress
of science itself.

that is why nothing is so dead as the scientific religion of yesterday.
it is far more completely dead than any revealed religion, because the
revealed religion, whatever may be the defects of its cosmology or its
history, has some human experience at its core which we can recognize
and to which we may respond. but a religion like scientific materialism
has nothing in it, except the pretension that it is a true account of
the world. once that pretension is exploded, it is wholly valueless as
a religion. it has become a collection of discarded concepts.


6. _the deeper conflict_

it follows from the very nature of scientific explanation, then, that
it cannot give men such a clue to a plan of existence as they find
in popular religion. for that plan must suppose that existence is
explained in terms of human destiny. now conceivably existence might
again be explained, as it was in the middle ages, as the drama of human
destiny. it does not seem probable to us; yet we cannot say that it
is impossible. but even if science worked out such an explanation, it
would still be radically different from the explanations which popular
religion employs.

for if it were honestly stated, it would be necessary to say first,
that it is tentative, and subject to disproof by further experiment;
second, that it is relative, in that [p132] the same facts seen from
some other point and with some other purpose in mind could be explained
quite differently; third, that it is not a picture of the world, as
god would see it, and as all men must see it, but that it is simply
one among many possible creations of the mind into which most of the
data of experience can be fitted. when the scientist had finished
setting down his qualifications, the essence of the matter as a simple,
devout man sees it, would have evaporated. certainty, as the devout
desire it, would be gone; verity, as they understand it, would be gone;
objectivity, as they imagine it, would be gone. what would remain
would be a highly abstracted, logical fiction, suited to disinterested
inquiry, but utterly unsuited to be the vehicle of his salvation.

the difficulty of reconciling popular religion with science is far
deeper than that of reconciling genesis with darwin, or any statement
of fact in the bible with any discovery by scientists. it is the
difficulty of reconciling the human desire for a certain kind of
universe with a method of explaining the world which is absolutely
neutral in its intention. one can by twisting language sufficiently
“reconcile” genesis with “evolution.” but what no one can do is to
guarantee that science will not destroy the doctrine of evolution the
day after it has been triumphantly proved that genesis is compatible
with the theory of evolution. as a matter of fact, just that has
happened. the darwinian theory, which theologians are busily accepting,
is so greatly modified already by science that some of it is almost as
obsolete as the babylonian myth in genesis. the reconciliation which
theologians are attempting is an impossible one, because one of the
[p133] factors which has to be reconciled—namely, the scientific
theory, changes so rapidly that the layman is never sure at any one
moment what the theory is which he has to reconcile with religious
dogma.

yet the purpose of these attempts at reconciliation is evident enough.
it is to find a solid foundation for human ideals in the facts of
existence. authority based on revelation once provided that foundation.
it gave an account of how the world began, of how it is governed, and
of how it will end, which made pain and joy, hope and fear, desire and
the denial of desire the central motives in the cosmic drama. this
account no longer satisfies our curiosity as to the nature of things;
the authority which certifies it no longer commands our complete
allegiance. the prestige, which once adhered to those who spoke by
revelation, has passed to scientists. but science, though it is the
most reliable method of knowledge we now possess, does not provide
an account of the world in which human destiny is the central theme.
therefore, science, though it has displaced revelation, is not a
substitute for it. it yields a radically different kind of knowledge.
it explains the facts. but it does not pretend to justify the ways of
god to man. it enables us to realize some of our hopes. but it offers
no guarantees that they can be fulfilled.


7. _theocracy and humanism_

there is a revolution here in the realm of the spirit. we may describe
it briefly by saying that whereas men once felt they were living under
the eye of an all-powerful spectator, to-day they are watched only by
their neighbors [p134] and their own consciences. a few, perhaps, act
as if posterity were aware of them; the great number feel themselves
accountable only to their own consciences or to the opinion of the
society in which they live. once men believed that they would be judged
at the throne of god. they believed that he saw not only their deeds
but their motives; there was no hole deep enough into which a man could
crawl to hide himself from the sight of god; there was no mood, however
fleeting, which escaped his notice.

the moral problem for each man, therefore, was to make his will conform
to the will of god. there were differences of opinion as to how this
could be done. there were differing conceptions of the nature of god,
and of what he most desired. but there was no difference of opinion on
the main point that it was imperative to obey him. whether they thought
they could serve god best by burnt offerings or a contrite heart, by
slaying the infidel or by loving their neighbors, by vows of poverty or
by the magnificence of their altars, they never doubted that the chief
duty of man, and his ultimate chance of happiness, was to discover and
then to cultivate a right relationship to a supreme being.

this was the major premise upon which all human choices hinged. there
followed from it certain necessary conclusions. in determining what was
a right relationship to god, the test of rightness lay in a revelation
of the putative experience of god and not in the actual experience of
his creatures. it was god alone, therefore, who really understood the
reasons for righteousness and its nature. “the procedure of divine
justice,” said [p135] calvin, “is too high to be scanned by human
measure or comprehended by the feebleness of human intellect.” that was
good which man understood was good in the eyes of god, regardless of
how it seemed to men.

thus the distinction between good and evil, including not only all
rules of personal conduct but the whole arrangement of rights and
duties in society, were laws established not by the consent of the
governed, but by a king in heaven. they were his commandments. by
obedience men could obtain happiness. but they obtained it not because
virtue is the cause of happiness but because god rewarded with
happiness those who obeyed his commandments. men did not really know
why god preferred certain kinds of conduct; they merely professed to
know what kind of conduct he preferred. they could not really ask
themselves what the difference was between good and evil. that was a
secret locked in the nature of a being whose choices were ultimately
inscrutable. the only question was what he willed. even job had to be
content without fathoming his reasons.

the moral commandments based upon divine authority were, in the nature
of things, rather broad generalizations. obviously there could not be
special revelation as to the unique aspects of each human difficulty.
the divine law, like our ordinary human law, was addressed to typical
rather than to individual cases. nevertheless, for much the greater
part of recorded history men have accepted such law without questioning
its validity. they could not have done so if the rules of morality had
not, at least in some rough way, worked. it is not difficult to see
why they worked. they were broad rules of conduct imposed [p136] upon
people living close to the soil, upon people, therefore, whose ways of
living changed little in the course of generations. the same situations
were so nearly and so often repeated that a typical solution would on
the whole be satisfactory.

these typical solutions, such as we find in the mosaic law or the
code of hammurabi, were no doubt the deposits of custom. they had,
therefore, become perfected in practice, and were solidly based upon
human experience. in the society in which they originated, there was
nothing arbitrary or alien about them. when, therefore, the lawgiver
carried these immemorial usages up with him on to sinai, and brought
them down again graven on tablets of stone, the rationality of the
revelation was self-evident. it appeared to be arbitrary only when a
radical change in the way of life dissolved the premises and the usages
upon which the authoritative code was established.

that dissolution has proceeded to great lengths within the centuries
which we call modern. the crisis was reached, it seems, during the
eighteenth century, and in the teaching of immanuel kant it was made
manifest to the educated classes of the western world. kant argued
in the _critique of pure reason_ that the existence of god cannot be
demonstrated. he then insisted that without belief in god, freedom, and
immortality, there was no valid and true morality. so he insisted that
god must exist to justify morality. this highly sophisticated doctrine
marks the end of simple theism in modern thought. for kant’s proof of
the existence of god was nothing but a plea that god ought to exist,
and the whole temper [p137] of the modern intellect is to deny that
what ought to be true necessarily is true.

insofar as men have now lost their belief in a heavenly king, they have
to find some other ground for their moral choices than the revelation
of his will. it follows necessarily that they must find the tests of
righteousness wholly within human experience. the difference between
good and evil must be a difference which men themselves recognize and
understand. happiness cannot be the reward of virtue; it must be the
intelligible consequence of it. it follows, too, that virtue cannot be
commanded; it must be willed out of personal conviction and desire.
such a morality may properly be called humanism, for it is centered not
in superhuman but in human nature. when men can no longer be theists,
they must, if they are civilized, become humanists. they must live
by the premise that whatever is righteous is inherently desirable
because experience will demonstrate its desirability. they must live,
therefore, in the belief that the duty of man is not to make his
will conform to the will of god but to the surest knowledge of the
conditions of human happiness.

it is evident that a morality of humanism presents far greater
difficulties than a morality premised on theism. for one thing, it
is put immediately to a much severer test. when kant, for example,
argued that theism was necessary to morality, his chief reason was that
since the good man is often defeated on earth, he must be permitted to
believe in a superhuman power which is “able to connect happiness and
morality in exact harmony with each other.” humanism is not provided
with such [p138] reserves of moral credit; it cannot claim all
eternity in which its promises may be fulfilled. unless its wisdom in
any sphere of life is demonstrated within a reasonable time in actual
experience, there is nothing to commend it.

a morality of humanism labors under even greater difficulties.
it appears in a complex and changing society; it is an attitude
toward life to which rational men necessarily turn whenever their
circumstances have rendered a theistic view incredible. it is just
because the simpler rules no longer work that the subtler choices
of humanism present themselves. these choices have to be made under
conditions, like those which prevail in modern urban societies, where
the extreme complexity of rapidly changing human relations makes it
very difficult to foresee all the consequences of any moral decision.
the men who must make their decisions are skeptical by habit and
unsettled amidst the novelties of their surroundings.

the teachers of a theistic morality, when the audience is devout, have
only to fortify the impression that the rules of conduct are certified
by god the invisible king. the ethical problem for the common man is
to recognize the well-known credentials of his teachers. in practice
he has merely to decide whether the priest, the prince, and the
elders, are what they claim to be. when he has done that, there are no
radical questions to be asked. but the teachers of humanism have no
credentials. their teaching is not certified. they have to prove their
case by the test of mundane experience. they speak with no authority,
which can be scrutinized once and for all, and then forever accepted.
they can proclaim no rule of conduct with certainty, for they have no
inherent personal [p139] authority and they cannot be altogether sure
they are right. they cannot command. they cannot truly exhort. they
can only inquire, infer, and persuade. they have only human insight
to guide them and those to whom they speak must in the end themselves
accept the full responsibility for the consequences of any advice they
choose to accept.

yet with all its difficulties, it is to a morality of humanism that men
must turn when the ancient order of things dissolves. when they find
that they no longer believe seriously and deeply that they are governed
from heaven, there is anarchy in their souls until by conscious effort
they find ways of governing themselves.




                             part ii [p141]

                      the foundations of humanism

             _the stone which the builders rejected,
              the same is become the head of the corner?_
                                                 luke xx, 17.




introduction [p143]


the upshot of the discussion to this point is that modernity destroys
the disposition to believe that behind the visible world of physical
objects and human institutions there is a supernatural kingdom from
which ultimately all laws, all judgments, all rewards, all punishments,
and all compensations are derived. to those who believe that this
kingdom exists the modern spirit is nothing less than treason to god.

the popular religion rests on the belief that the kingdom is an
objective fact, as certain, as definite, and as real, in spite of
its invisibility, as the british empire; it holds that this faith
is justified by overwhelming evidence supplied by revelation,
unimpeachable testimony, and incontrovertible signs. to the modern
spirit, on the other hand, the belief in this kingdom must necessarily
seem a grandiose fiction projected by human needs and desires. the
humanistic view is that the popular faith does not prove the existence
of its objects, but only the presence of a desire that such objects
should exist. the popular religion, in short, rests on a theory which,
if true, is an extension of physics and of history; the humanistic view
rests on human psychology and an interpretation of human experience.

it follows, then, that in exploring the modern problem it is necessary
consciously and clearly to make a choice between these diametrically
opposite points of view. the [p144] choice is fundamental and
exclusive, and it determines all the conclusions which follow. for
obviously to one who believes that the world is a theocracy, the
problem is how to bring the strayed and rebellious masses of mankind
back to their obedience, how to restore the lost provinces of god the
invisible king. but to one who takes the humanistic view the problem is
how mankind, deprived of the great fictions, is to come to terms with
the needs which created those fictions.

in this book i take the humanistic view because, in the kind of world i
happen to live in, i can do no other.




chapter viii [p145]

golden memories


it will be granted, i suppose, that there would be no need for
certainty about the plan and government of the universe if, as a
matter of course, all our desires were regularly fulfilled. in a world
where no man desired what he could not have, there would be no need to
regulate human conduct and therefore no need for morality. in a world
where each man could have what he desired, there would be no need for
consolation and for reassuring guarantees that justice, mercy, and love
will ultimately prevail. in a world where there was perfect adjustment
between human desires and their environment, there would be no problem
of evil: we should not know the meaning of sin, sorrow, crime, fear,
frustration, pain, and emptiness. we do not live in such a well-ordered
world. but we can imagine it by making either of two assumptions:
that we have ceased to desire anything which causes evil, or that
omnipotence fulfills all our desires. the first of these assumptions
leads to the nirvana of the buddhists, where all craving has ceased and
there is perfect peace. the second leads to the heaven of all popular
religions, to some paradise like that of mohammed perhaps where, as mr.
santayana says, men may “sit in well-watered gardens, clad in green
silks, drinking delicious sherbets, and transfixed by the gazelle-like
glance of some young girl, all innocence and fire.” [p146]

among educated men it has always been difficult to imagine a heaven
of fulfilled desires. for since no two persons have exactly the
same desires, one man’s imagination of heaven may not suit another
man’s. in general, the attempts which have been made to picture the
christian heaven reflect the temperaments of highly contemplative
spirits, and it is customary nowadays to say that this heaven would
be a most uninteresting place. no doubt it would be to those who are
not contemplative. but the objectors have missed the main point, which
is that no one is supposed to pass through the pearly gates who is
not suited to dwell in paradise. that is what st. peter is there for,
to see that the unfit do not enter; the other places, purgatory and
the inferno, are available to those spirits who could not be happy in
heaven. there are, by definition, no uncongenial spirits in heaven.
there were once, but satan and his followers were thrown out headlong,
and they now live in places which are suited to their temperaments. a
devout man may quite properly, therefore, advise those who do not think
they would enjoy heaven to go to hell.

the attempt to imagine a heaven is an attempt to conceive a world in
which the disorders of human desire no longer exist. now it is in their
prayers that men have sought to come to terms with their disorders, and
their prayers reveal most concretely how much the hunger for certainty
and for help is a hunger for the fulfillment of desire. for prayer,
says father wynne, is “the expression of our desires to god whether
for ourselves or for others.” in the higher reaches of religion “the
expression is not intended to instruct or direct god what to do, but to
[p147] appeal to his goodness for the things we need; and the appeal
is necessary, not because he is ignorant of our needs or sentiments,
but to give definite form to our desires, to concentrate our whole
attention on what we have to recommend to him, to help us appreciate
our close personal relation with him.” but in order to know what to
pray for, we need grace, that is to say, god himself must teach us what
to ask him for. we can be sure that we should pray for salvation, but
in particular we need guidance from god “to know the special means that
will most help us in any particular need.” but besides the spiritual
objects of prayer “we are to ask also for temporal things, our daily
bread and all that it implies, health, strength, and other worldly or
temporal goods ...”; we are to pray also for escape from evils, “the
penalty of our sins, the dangers of temptation, and every manner of
physical or spiritual affliction.”

there has, however, always been a logical difficulty about offering
petitions to an all-wise and all-powerful providence. thus in the
_dialogue of dives and pauper_, which was published in 1493, the
question is put: “why pray we to god with oure mouth sithe he knowyth
alle oure thoughte, all our desire, al our wyl and what us nedeth?”
to this question the only answer which was not evasive came from the
mystics who led a life of contemplation. prayer, they said, is not mere
petition; it is communion with god. it is not because prayer gives a
man what he wants, but because it “ones the soul to god,” that it is
rational and necessary. this, too, is the conception of prayer held by
a liberal pastor like dr. fosdick who looks with scorn upon “clamorous
petition to an [p148] anthropomorphic god” and says that “true prayer
... is to assimilate ... (the) spirit which is god (that) ... surrounds
our lives.” the same idea, stated in somewhat more precise language,
is set down by mr. santayana when he says that “in rational prayer the
soul may be said to accomplish three things important to its welfare:
it withdraws within itself and defines its good, it accommodates itself
to destiny, and it grows like the ideal which it conceives.”

but, of course, this is not the way the common man through the ages
has conceived prayer. in fact he must have prayed before he had any
clear conception of what a prayer is or of whom it is addressed to.
thus we are told that in arcadia the girls invoked hera by the title of
“hera the girl,” the married women prayed to “hera the married one,”
and the widows prayed to “hera the widow.” sometimes the prayer is a
spontaneous expression of sorrow or of delight, a lyrical cry which
has no ulterior purpose and is addressed to no one. sometimes prayer
is a magical formula which compels the deity to listen and to obey.
the subject is both complicated and obscure. but this much at least is
clear: along with elements which can be described only as spontaneous
and lyrical, with traces of magic, and at times with a purely
disinterested desire to commune with god, simple people have looked
upon prayer as “an instrument for applying god’s illimitable power to
daily life.”

popular discussion of prayer has often been extremely practical: “how
can prayer be made most efficient? is it by ordinary masses or by other
offices? is it by the elaboration or the multiplication of services?”
lady alice [p149] west who died in 1395 ordered 4400 masses “in the
most haste that it may be do, withynne xiiii nyght next after my
deces.” thomas walwayn who died in 1415 left orders for 10,000 masses
“with oute pompe whyche may not profyt myn soule.” john plot, however,
wished his masses said “with solempne seruise that ys for to sayn
wyth belle ryngyng.” there was debate as to whether prayers were most
effective if said in rome or in the holy land ... by certain priests
rather than by others ... by the friars rather than by the priests ...
whether there were more potent prayers than the _pater_ ... whether
prayers should be addressed to the father, the son, or to st. mary
... whether st. mary could be approached best through her mother, st.
anne....

it is not necessary to dogmatize by saying that prayer is magic, or
soliloquy, or communion, or petition for this and that, in order to
see that it is the expression of a human need. the quality of the need
varies. it may be anything from a desire for rain to a desire for
friendship with unseen spirits, but always it illustrates the saying
that “all men stand in need of god.”

if we ask ourselves what we mean by ‘need,’ we must answer, i suppose,
that the resources of our own natures and the power we are able to
exercise over events are insufficient to satisfy the cravings of our
natures. we must eat, but we cannot be sure that drought will not
destroy the crops. we are beset by enemies, and we are not sure we
can conquer them. we are threatened by earthquake, storm, and disease
against which we cannot wholly protect ourselves. we become deeply
attached to other persons. but they must die and we must die, and we
cannot stay [p150] the doom. in brief, we find ourselves in a world in
which our hopes are defeated.

somehow we are so constituted that we demand the impossible. there is
in us somewhere an intimation that we ought not to be defeated. but
where did this intimation come from? how is it that we are not born
satisfied with our mortality, content with our fate? why is it that the
normal fate of man seems to us abnormal? what is there in the back of
our heads which keeps telling us that life as we find it is not what it
ought to be?

the biologist might answer, i suppose, that this craving for a
different kind of world is simply our own consciousness of that blind
push of natural forces which create the variations on which natural
selection works to produce the survival of the fittest. nature, he
might say, is wholly indifferent to the outcries of the individual;
this vast process of which each of us is so insignificant a part,
keeps going because there is in all the parts a superabundant urging
to go on. there is no human economy in it and no human order. man, for
example, has far more sexual desire than is needed for the rational
propagation of the species. but there is no rational plan in nature. it
works here, and everywhere, on the principle that by having too much
there will surely be enough; the seeds which do not germinate, the
seedlings which perish, the desires which are left over, are no concern
of nature’s. for nature has no concern. there is no concern except that
which we ourselves feel, and that is a mere flicker on the stream of
time, and will soon go out.

while there is no way of gainsaying that this explanation is true,
it is true only if we look at life from the particular point of view
which the biologist adopts. if, however, [p151] we look inwardly
upon ourselves, instead of surveying our species from the outside, we
find, i think, that this sense that the world ought not to be what it
is seems to originate in a kind of dim memory that it once was what
we feel it ought to be. indeed, so vivid is this memory that for ages
men took it to be an account of historical events; in absolute good
faith they constituted for themselves the picture of a golden age which
existed before evil came into the world. hope was, therefore, a kind
of memory; the ideal was to achieve something which had been lost. the
memory of an age of innocence has haunted the whole of mankind. it has
been a light behind their present experience which cast shadows upon
it, and made it seem insubstantial and not inevitable. before this
life, there had been another which was happier. and so they reasoned
that what once was possible must somehow be possible again. having once
known the good, it was unbelievable that evil should be final.

even after criticism has dissolved the beautiful legends in which it
was embodied, this memory of a golden age persists. it persists as an
intimation of our own inward experience, and like an uneasy spirit it
intrudes itself upon our most realistic efforts to accept the world
as we find it. for it takes many shapes, which sometimes deceive us,
appearing then not as the memory of a happiness we have lost, but as
the anticipation of utopia to come.

it is an intimation that man is entitled to live in the land of heart’s
desire. it is a deep conviction that happiness is possible, and all
inquiry into the foundations of morals turns ultimately upon whether
man can achieve this happiness by pursuing his desires, or whether he
must first learn to desire the kind of happiness which is possible.




chapter ix [p152]

the insight of humanism


1. _the two approaches to life_

the land of heart’s desire is a place in which no man desires what he
cannot have and each man can have what he desires. there have been
great differences of opinion among men as to how they could best enter
this happy land.

if they thought their natural impulses were by way of being lecherous,
greedy, and cruel, they have accepted some form of the classical and
christian doctrine that man must subdue his naive impulses, and by
reason, grace, or renunciation, transform his will. if they thought
that man was naturally innocent and good, they have accepted some one
of the many variants of liberalism, and concerned themselves not with
the reform of desire but with the provision of opportunities for its
fulfilment.

there are differences of emphasis among liberals, but they all accept
the same premise, which is that if only external circumstances are
favorable the internal life of man will adjust itself successfully.
so completely does this theory of human nature dominate the field of
contemporary thought that modern men are rarely reminded, and then only
by those whom it is the fashion to ignore, that they are challenging
the testimony not merely of their maiden aunts, but of all the greatest
teachers of wisdom. [p153] yet if the modern man is an optimist on
the subject of his impulses, the reason is to be found less in his own
self-confidence than in his distrust of men and in his intoxication
over things.

owing to the dissolution of the ancestral order he has learned to
distrust those who exercise authority. owing to the progress of science
he has acquired an unbounded confidence in his capacity to create
desirable objects. he is so rebellious and so constructive that he has
still to ask himself whether the free and naive pursuit of desirable
objects can really produce a desirable world. yet in all the books of
wisdom that is the question which confronts him. there it is written in
many languages and in the idiom of many different cultures that if man
is to find happiness, he must reconstruct not merely his world, but,
first of all, himself.

is this wisdom dead and done with, or has it a bearing upon the deep
uneasiness of the modern man? the answer depends upon what we must
conceive to be the nature of man.


2. _freedom and restraint_

it is significant that fashions in human nature are continually
changing. there are, as it were, two extremes: at the one is the belief
that our naive passions are evil, at the other that they are good,
and between these two poles, the prevailing opinion oscillates. one
might suppose that somewhere, perhaps near the center, there would be
a point which was the truth, and that on that point men would reach
an agreement. but experience shows that there is no agreement, and
that there is no known point [p154] where the two views are perfectly
balanced. the fact is that the prevailing view is invariably a rebound
from the excesses of the other, and one can understand it only by
knowing what it is a reaction from.

it is impossible, for example, to do justice to rousseau and
the romantics without understanding the dead classicism, the
conventionalities, and the tyrannies of the eighteenth century. it is
equally impossible to do justice to the eighteenth century without
understanding the licentiousness of the high renaissance and the
political disorders resulting from the reformation. these in their turn
become intelligible only when we have understood the later consequences
of the mediæval view of life. no particular view endures. when human
nature is wholly distrusted and severely repressed, sooner or later it
asserts itself and bursts its bonds; and when it is naively trusted, it
produces so much disorder and corruption that men once again idealize
order and restraint.

we happen to be living in an age when there is a severe reaction
against the distrust and repression practiced by those whom it is
customary to describe as puritans. it is, in fact, a reaction against a
degenerate form of puritanism which manifested itself as a disposition
to be prim, prudish, and pedantic. for latter-day puritanism had become
a rather second-rate notion that less obvious things are more noble
than grosser ones and that spirituality is the pursuit of rarefied
sensations. it had embraced the idea that a man had advanced in the
realm of the spirit in proportion to his concern with abstractions, and
cults of grimly spiritual persons devoted themselves to the worship of
sonorous generalities. all this associated itself [p155] with a rather
preposterous idealism which insisted that maidens should be wan and
easily frightened, that draperies and decorations should conceal the
essential forms of objects, and that the good life had something to do
with expurgated speech, with pale colors, and shadows and silhouettes,
with the thin music of harps and soprano voices, with fig leaves and
a general conspiracy to tell lies to children, with philosophies that
denied the reality of evil, and with all manner of affectation and
self-deception.

yet in these many attempts to grow wings and take off from the things
that are of the earth earthy, it is impossible not to recognize a
resemblance, somewhat in the nature of a caricature, to the teaching of
the sages. there is no doubt that in one form or another, socrates and
buddha, jesus and st. paul, plotinus and spinoza, taught that the good
life is impossible without asceticism, that without renunciation of
many of the ordinary appetites, no man can really live well. prejudice
against the human body and a tendency to be disgusted with its habits,
a contempt for the ordinary concerns of daily experience is to be
found in all of them, and it is not surprising that men, living in an
age of moral confusion like that associated with the name of the good
queen victoria, should have come to believe that if only they covered
up their passions they had conquered them. it was a rather ludicrous
mistake as the satirists of the anti-victorian era have so copiously
pointed out. but at least there was a dim recognition in this cult of
the genteel that the good life does involve some kind of conquest of
the carnal passions.

that conception of the good life has become so repulsive [p156] to the
present generation that it is almost incapable of understanding and
appreciating the original insight of which the works of dr. bowdler and
mrs. grundy are a caricature. yet it is a fact, and a most arresting
one, that in all the great religions, and in all the great moral
philosophies from aristotle to bernard shaw, it is taught that one of
the conditions of happiness is to renounce some of the satisfactions
which men normally crave. this tradition as to what constitutes the
wisdom of life is supported by testimony from so many independent
sources that it cannot be dismissed lightly. with minor variations it
is a common theme in the teaching of an athenian aristocrat like plato,
an indian nobleman like buddha, and a humble jew like spinoza; in
fact, wherever men have thought at all carefully about the problem of
evil and of what constitutes a good life, they have concluded that an
essential element in any human philosophy is renunciation. they cannot
all have been so foolish as anthony comstock. they must have had some
insight into experience which led them to that conclusion.

if asceticism in all its forms were as stupid and cruel as it is now
the fashion to think it is, then the traditions of saintliness and
of heroism are monstrously misleading. for in the legends of heroes,
of sages, of explorers, inventors and discoverers, of pioneers and
patriots, there is almost invariably this same underlying theme of
sacrifice and unworldliness. they are poor. they live dangerously. by
ordinary standards they are extremely uncomfortable. they give up ease,
property, pleasure, pride, place, and power to attain things which are
transcendent and rare. they live for ends which seem to yield them
[p157] no profit, and they are ready to die, if need be, for that
which the dead can no longer enjoy. and yet, though there is nothing
in our current morality to justify their unworldliness, we continue to
admire them greatly.

in saying all this i am not trying to clinch an argument by appealing
to great names. there is much in the teaching of all the spiritual
leaders of the past which is wholly obsolete to-day, and there is no
compulsive authority in any part of their teaching. they may have been
as mistaken in their insight into the human soul as they usually were
in their notions of physics and history. to say, then, that there is
an ascetic element in all the great philosophies of the past is not
proof that there must be one in modern philosophy. but it creates a
presumption, i think, which cannot be ignored, for we must remember
that the least perishable part of the literature and thought of the
past is that which deals with human nature. scientific method and
historical scholarship have enormously increased our competence in
the whole field of physics and history. but for an understanding of
human nature we are still very largely dependent, as they were, upon
introspection, general observation, and intuition. there has been no
revolutionary advance here since the hellenic philosophers. that is why
aristotle’s ethics is still as fresh for anyone who accustoms himself
to the idiom as nietzsche, or freud, or bertrand russell, whereas
aristotle’s physics, his biology, or his zoology is of interest only to
antiquarians.

it is, then, as an insight into human nature, and not as a rule
authoritatively imposed or highly sanctioned by the prestige of great
men, that i propose now to inquire what meaning there is for us in the
fact that men in the [p158] past have so persistently associated the
good life with some form of ascetic discipline and renunciation. the
modern world, as it has emancipated itself from its ancestral regime,
has assumed almost as a matter of course that the human passions, if
thoroughly liberated from all tyrannies and distortions, would by their
fulfilment achieve happiness. all those who teach asceticism, deny
this major premise of modernity, and the result is that the prevailing
philosophy is at odds on the most fundamental of all issues with the
wisdom of the past.


3. _the ascetic principle_

the average man to-day, when he hears the word asceticism, is likely
to think of st. simeon stylites who sat on top of a pillar, of hermits
living in caves, of hair-shirts, of long fasts, chastity, strange
vigils, and even of tattooing, self-mutilation, and flagellation. or
if he does not think of such examples, which the modern man regards as
pathological and for the psychiatrist to explain, the word asceticism
may connote some such attitude of mind as herbert asbury has recorded
in the biography of his kinsman, bishop asbury, the founder of american
methodism, of whom a friend, who knew him well, wrote: “i never saw
him indulge in even innocent pleasantry. his was the solemnity of an
apostle; it was so interwoven with his conduct that he could not put
off the gravity of the bishop either in the parlour or the dining-room.
he was a rigid enemy to ease; hence the pleasures of study and the
charms of recreation he alike sacrificed to the more sublime work
of saving souls.... he knew nothing about pleasing the flesh at the
expense of duty; flesh [p159] and blood were enemies with whom he
never took counsel.”

if asceticism meant only this sort of thing, it might be interesting
only as a curiosity. but apart from the asceticism of primitive peoples
and of the pathological, there is a sane and civilized asceticism which
presents a quite different face. there is, for example, the argument of
socrates in the _phædo_ that the body is a nuisance to a philosopher in
search of truth. it is, he says, “a source of endless trouble to us by
reason of the mere requirement of food; and is liable also to diseases
which overtake and impede us in the search after true being: it fills
us full of loves, and lusts, and fears, and fancies of all kinds, and
endless foolery, and in fact, as men say, takes away from us the power
of thinking at all. whence come wars, and fightings, and factions?
whence but from the body and the lusts of the body? wars are occasioned
by the love of money, and money has to be acquired for the sake and in
the service of the body; and by reason of all these impediments we have
no time to give to philosophy; and, last and worst of all, even if we
are at leisure and betake ourselves to some speculation, the body is
always breaking in upon us, causing us turmoil and confusion in our
inquiries, and so amazing us that we are prevented from seeing the
truth.”

plato, in pursuing the argument in this particular dialogue, concludes
that because the body is such a nuisance the only pure philosopher is
a dead one. it is, perhaps, a logical conclusion. but in other places,
particularly in the _republic_, plato described a system of education
which he thought would produce philosophers: the neophytes [p160]
were put through a stern discipline of hard living and gymnastics and
learning, were compelled to live in tents, to own nothing which they
could call their own, and to cut themselves off from all family ties.

when the description of this regime provokes adeimantus to remark
that “you are not making the men of this class particularly happy,”
socrates is made to reply that while it is not his object to make any
class particularly happy, yet it would not surprise him if in the given
circumstances even this class were very happy. when we look further
for his meaning, we find it to be that the guardians are trained by
their ascetic discipline to abandon all private aims and to find their
happiness in an appreciation of a perfectly ordered commonwealth. if
we understand this we shall, i believe, understand what civilized
asceticism means. we shall have come back to the original meaning of
the word itself, which is derived from the greek ἀσκέω, “i practice,”
and “embodies a metaphor taken from the ancient wrestling place or
palæstra, where victory rewarded those who had best trained their
bodies.” an ascetic in the original meaning of the term is an athlete;
and it was in this spirit that the early christians trained themselves
deliberately as “athletes of christ” to bear without flinching the
tortures of their martyrdom.

when asceticism is irrational, it is a form of totemism or fetich
worship and derives from a belief that certain things are tabu or
that evil spirits can be placated by human suffering. or without any
coherent belief whatsoever asceticism may be merely a perversion
arising out of that ambivalence of the human passions which often makes
pain, inflicted on others or self-inflicted, an exquisite [p161]
pleasure. but when asceticism is rational, it is a discipline of the
mind and body to fit men for the service of an ideal. its purpose
is to harden and to purify, to suppress contrary passions, and thus
to intensify the passion for the ideal. “i chastise my body,” said
st. paul, “and bring it into subjection.” the church, especially in
the earlier centuries, was compelled to fight continually against
irrational asceticism, and as late as the middle ages, the inquisition
pursued sects which regarded marriage as the “greater adultery” and
practiced self-emasculation. the rational view was the view of st.
jerome: “be on your guard when you begin to mortify your body by
abstinence and fasting, lest you imagine yourself to be perfect and a
saint; for perfection does not consist in this virtue. it is only a
help; a disposition; a means, though a fitting one, for the attainment
of true perfection.”

now when st. paul said that he had to bring his body into subjection,
when aristotle defined the barbarians’ ideal as “the living as one
likes,” when plato made socrates say that the soul is infected by
the body, when buddha preached the extinction of all craving, when
spinoza wrote that because we rejoice in virtue we are able to
control our lusts, they accepted a view of human nature which is
quite diametrically opposed to one which has had wide currency in our
civilization since the renaissance.

this contrary view was undoubtedly provoked by the evils which came
from the attempt to put the ascetic principle extensively into
practice. rabelais is by all odds the most convincing of the moderns
who revolted, for [p162] rabelais not only talked about the natural
man but actually knew him and delighted in him. thus when villers
writes to madame de staël that in her work “primitive, incorruptible,
naive, passionate nature” is “in conflict with the barriers and
shackles of conventional life,” we feel, i think, that neither villers
nor the lady would really have cared very much for primitive nature in
all its naivete. the natural man that they were talking about lived
in arcady and his passions were as violent as those of a lapdog;
throughout the romantic movement, with rare exceptions, the talk about
passion and impulse and instinct has this air of unreality and of
neurotic confusion. there is not in it, as there is in rabelais, for
example, an honest gusto for the passions that are to be liberated
from the restraints imposed by that “rabble of squint-minded fellows,
dissembling and counterfeit saints, demure lookers, hypocrites,
pretended zealots, tough friars, buskin-monks, and other such sects of
men, who disguise themselves like masquers to deceive the world.”

rabelais advised his readers that if they desired to become good
pantagruelists, “that is to say, to live in peace, joy, health, making
yourself always merry—never trust those men that always peep out
through a little hole.” and in establishing the abbey of theleme,
gargantua furnished it magnificently and barred the gates against
bigots, hypocrites, dissemblers, attorneys, barristers, usurers,
drunkards, and cannibals; he invited in all noble blades and brisk
and handsome people, faithful expounders of the scripture, and lovely
ladies, proper, fair, and mirthful. “their life,” he says, “was spent
not in laws, statutes, or rules, but at their own free will and
pleasure. [p163] they rose from bed when they thought good, drank,
ate, worked, slept, when the desire came to them. none did awaken them,
none constrained them either to drink or eat, nor to do any other
thing: for so had gargantua established it. the rule of their order had
but one clause: _do what thou wilt._”

but there was a catch in this rule. not only had drunkards and
cannibals been excluded in the first place, but rabelais assures us
that those who were admitted, because they were “free, well born, well
educated, and accustomed to good company, have by nature an instinct
and spur which prompts them to virtuous acts and withdraws them from
vice. this they call honor.” and in another passage rabelais limits the
propensities of the natural man even more radically when he speaks of
“a certain gaiety of spirit _cured_ in contempt of chance and fortune.”

there is always a catch in any doctrine of the natural goodness of man.
for mere passive obedience to impulse as it comes and goes, without
effort to check it or direct it, ends in something like alfred de
musset’s rolla, of whom it was said:

  it was not rolla who ruled his life,
  it was his passions; he let them go
  as a drowsy shepherd watches the water flow.

so even dora russell at the crisis of her assault upon the christian
tradition advises us to “live by instinct _and_ intelligence,” which
must mean, if it means anything, that intelligence is to be in some
respects the master as well as the servant of instinct. that this is
what mrs. russell means is abundantly plain by her fury at capitalists,
imperialists, [p164] conservatives, and churchmen, whose instincts
lead them to do things of which she does not approve. for like her
distinguished husband she trusts those impulses which are creative and
beneficent, and distrusts those which are possessive and destructive.
that is to say, like every other moralist, she trusts those parts of
human nature which she trusts.


4. _oscillation between two principles_

these cycles of action and reaction are disastrous to the establishment
of a stable humanism. a theocratic culture depends upon an assured
view of the way in which god governs the universe, and as long as
that view suits the typical needs of a society made stable by custom,
the theocratic culture is stable. but humanism arises in complex
and changing societies, and if it is to have any power to make life
coherent and orderly, it must hold an assured view of how man can
govern himself. if he oscillates aimlessly between the belief that he
must distrust his impulses and the belief that he may naively obey
them, it is impossible for him to fix any point of reference for
the development of his moral code, his educational plans, his human
relationships, his politics, and his personal ideals.

it is not hard to see, i think, why he oscillates in this fashion
between trust and distrust. he cannot obey every impulse, for he has
conflicting impulses within himself. there are also his neighbors with
their impulses. they cannot all be satisfied, for the very simple
reason that the sum of their demands far outruns the available supply
of satisfactions. there is not room enough, there are not objects
[p165] enough in the world to fulfill all human desires. desires are,
for all practical purposes, unlimited and insatiable, and therefore any
ethics which does not recognize the necessity of putting restraint upon
naive desire is inherently absurd. on the other hand, it is impossible
to distrust every impulse, for the only conclusion then is to commit
suicide. buddha did, to be sure, teach that craving was the source
of all misery, and that it must be wholly extinguished. but it is
evident from an examination of what he actually advised his disciples
to renounce, that while they were to be poor, chaste, unworldly, and
incurious about the nature of things, they were to be rewarded with
the highest of all satisfactions, and were to be “like the broad
earth, unvexed; like the pillar of the city gate, unmoved; like a
pellucid lake, unruffled.” for nirvana meant, as rhys davids says, the
extinction of a sinful, grasping condition of mind.

confronted by two opposed views of human nature, neither of which can
be taken unreservedly, moralists have had to pick and choose, deciding
how much or how little they would trust the different impulses. but
there is no measure by which they could decide how much of an impulse
is virtuous, how much more is intemperate, and how much more than
that is utterly sinful. the attempts to regulate the sexual impulse
illustrate the difficulty. shall the moralist call the complete
absence of all conscious sexual desire virtue? then he disobeys the
commandment to be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth. shall
he then limit virtuous desire to that which is felt for a lawful
mate? that implies that man and woman must mate with the first person
for whom they feel any sexual desire. [p166] but this cannot always
be arranged. the first person may be otherwise engaged. it becomes
necessary then to permit a certain amount of promiscuous, though
unfulfilled, sexual desire in the process of sexual selection. and
then having somehow gotten past that difficulty, and with two persons
safely mated, a whole new series of problems arise out of the question
of how far sexual satisfaction depends for its virtue upon its being
the successful means to, or more subtly still, the intended means
to, procreation. i shall not pursue the matter further. the attempt
to measure the degree in which impulse is to be permitted to express
itself is obviously full of difficulties.

the moral problem remains utterly insoluble as long as men regard it as
an attempt to separate their good impulses from their bad ones, and to
decide how much their good impulses are to be encouraged. morality, if
it is not fixed by custom and authority, becomes a mere matter of taste
determined by the idiosyncrasies of the moralist.


5. _the golden mean and its difficulties_

aristotle faced this fundamental difficulty of humanism in the
_ethics_. he had expounded the theory that happiness is due to virtue,
and that virtue is a mean between two extremes. there must, he said, be
neither defect nor excess of any quality. we must, in brief, go so far
but no further in obedience to our impulses. thus between rashness and
cowardice the mean is courage; between prodigality and niggardliness
it is liberality; between incontinence and total abstinence it is
temperateness; between ostentation and meanness it is magnificence;
between empty boasting and little-mindedness it is magnanimity; between
[p167] flattery and moroseness it is friendliness; between bashfulness
and impudence it is modesty; between arrogance and false modesty, it is
truthfulness.

so runs the aristotelian catalogue, and probably no code ever described
so well the ideal of a gentleman. but having laid down his general
precepts, aristotle, unlike most moralists, faced the difficulty of
applying them. he recognized that it is one thing to accept the theory
of a golden mean, and quite another to know where that mean lies. “for
in each case it is difficult to find the mean ... thus it is easy, and
in every man’s power to be angry, and to give and spend money; but to
determine the person to whom, and the quantity, and the time, and the
motive, and the manner, is no longer in every man’s power, nor is it
easy; therefore excellence is rare, and praiseworthy and honorable.”
for while the mean between excess and defect is excellent, “it is easy
to miss a mark, but difficult to hit it.”

if we look at the matter more closely in order to find out why moral
codes are, as aristotle says, so hit and miss, we must, i think, come
to the conclusion that there is an undetected fallacy in most moral
thinking which renders moral insight abortive. it is that fallacy which
i now propose to examine.

a moral code like aristotle’s, which we may fairly regard as the
rational prototype of all humanistic codes, consists of an inventory
of good and bad appetites and of good and bad satisfactions. all
conventional moralizing, which does not rest on the sheer fiat of
public opinion, custom, or god, assumes the existence of some such
inventory of permissible desires and permissible fulfilments. but what
[p168] does the making of such inventories mean? it means that good
and evil are believed to be objective qualities of the natural world
like weight, dimension, and motion, that certain desires are inherently
good, certain others are inherently bad, and that the same is true
of the different objects of desire. but this is nothing but what is
known as the pathetic fallacy. for surely each desire and each object
as such, taken separately without relation to anything else, is as
innocent and as neutral as the forces that move the planets.

the categories of good and evil would not apply if there were no
sentient being to experience good and evil. in such a world no object
would be any better or any worse than any other object; nobody talks
about good and bad electrons. all electrons are morally alike because
no sentient being can tell them apart. nor would the categories of
good and evil apply to a world in which each impulse was in a vacuum
of its own. in such a world all our impulses would be like our
digestive tracts on a day when we do not know we have a stomach. if
our impulses did not impinge upon each other and upon objects there
would be no problem of good and evil. therefore the quality of good
and evil lies not in impulses as such, nor in objects as such, but in
the relationship between impulses and objects. therefore the making of
inventories is fundamentally misleading.

there is another fallacy which is closely associated with this one.
we make lists of our impulses. a standard list which is much used
comprises the following: flight, repulsion, curiosity, pugnacity,
self-abasement, self-assertion, parental, reproductive, gregarious,
acquisitive, constructive. [p169] whether this is a good list or not
is neither here nor there. through the ages men have been making such
lists in the fond belief that they were analyzing the human character.
no doubt these terms describe something; we all recognize that these
words are the names of impulses that move us. but if we consider them
further, we must also recognize that these impulses do not move all
persons the same way, nor any one person the same way at all times in
his life and under all circumstances.

it is hardly necessary, i am sure, to labor the point very much. there
is the instinct to be curious: it disposes one man to measure the
diameter of betelgeuse when he is forty years old; when he was a child
it disposed him to find out whether he could hang up a cat by its
tail; that curious child’s companion in the experiment on the cat was
disposed, when he grew up, to take much trouble in finding out how much
income tax his neighbor paid and whether his employer was faithful to
his wife. the parental instinct of one man is to launch his child on
the world as an independent human being; in another man the instinct
manifests itself as a determination to have children who will depend
upon him and cater to him all his days long. so when we make lists of
our impulses we really do not know enough about them to pass judgment.
for desires are complex, and their greatest complexity lies in the fact
that they change.

the objects of desire are no less complex. take, for example, a jade
goddess. to a chinese coolie it is an object with mysterious powers, a
part of the mechanism which governs the universe. but the jade goddess
is now in a fifth avenue shop window, and a policeman on his beat
[p170] sees it. it is a green stone figure to him. the dealer inside
knows that it is rare and is worth a thousand dollars. the collector
could enjoy it immensely if he possessed it. the connoisseur finds
intricate pleasure in it as a work of art and an elaborate interest in
it as a memento of a whole culture. the objects of desire, then, are
not simple things. we help to create them. we say that this man desires
that woman. but what, in fact, does he desire? a few moments of ecstasy
from her body, something which a thousand women could give him equally
well, or an intimate union with so much of her whole being that for
that very reason she is unique to him? the quality of his passion and
the character of his mistress will depend in a very large degree on how
much of her being he takes into account. it depends also, i hasten to
add, on how much there is to take into account.

at any moment in our lives we desire only those objects which we are
then capable of desiring and in the way we are then capable of desiring
them. but our desires do not remain fixed from the cradle to the grave.
they change. and as they change the desirability of objects about us
changes too. it is impossible, then, to make lists of good and evil
desires and of good and evil objects. for good and evil are qualities
in the relationship between variable desires and variable objects of
desire.

the attempt to construct moral codes on the basis of an inventory
is an attempt to understand something which is always in process of
change by treating it as a still life and taking snapshots of it. that
is what moralists have almost always attempted to do. they have tried
to capture the essence of a changing thing in a collection [p171] of
fixed concepts. it cannot be done. the reality of human nature is bound
to elude us if we look only at a momentary cross-section of it. to
understand it, therefore, for the purposes of moralizing, we have to
revise our intellectual apparatus, and learn to look upon each moment
of behavior not as the manifestation of certain fixed elements in human
nature, but as a stage in the evolution of human nature. we grow up,
mature, and decline; being endowed with memory and the capacity to form
habits, our conduct is cumulative. we drag our past along with us and
it pushes us on. we do not make a new approach to each new experience.
we approach new experiences with the expectations and habits developed
by previous experience, and under the impact of novelty these
expectations and habits become modified.


6. _the matrix of humanism_

the conception of human nature as developing behavior is, of course,
accepted by all modern psychologists. if they study the child they are
bound to consider him as potentially an adult. if they study the adult
they are bound to regard him as originally a child. abnormal psychology
makes sense only insofar as it can be understood as an abnormal
development of the personality, regardless of whether that abnormality
is traceable to pre-natal variations, to organic disease, or to
functional disturbance. folk psychology, whether or not one accepts the
interesting but speculative hypothesis that there is a parallel between
the development of the individual and the development of the race, is
another mode of investigating the evolution of behavior. the concept
of development [p172] is thoroughly established in psychology as the
major clue to the understanding of human nature.

the moralist, since he is concerned with human nature, is compelled
to employ this concept. but he employs it somewhat differently than
the scientist. being a moralist, he is interested in understanding the
principles of behavior in order that he may understand the principles
of right behavior. the psychologist, as such, is interested in the
development of behavior, regardless of whether that development leads
to misery or to happiness. he studies the various processes no matter
where they lead. for in science the concept of development implies
no judgment as to whether there is a good or a bad development. the
development of an idiot and of a genius are on the same footing, and
are theoretically of equal interest. but to the moralist the study of
development is focussed on the effort to discover those processes of
development which can be made to produce right relationships between
the individual and his environment, and by a right relationship he is
bound to mean one in which there is an harmonious adjustment between
desires and the objects of desire. how often, and how nearly, it
is possible for human beings to approximate such perfection is an
unanswerable question. the proof of that pudding lies in the eating
of it, and it is not the function of the moralist under humanism to
guarantee the outcome. his function is to point out as clearly as it is
possible to do so the path which presumably leads toward the good life.

in describing that path he is bound to depend upon the best available
insight into the processes by which good and bad adjustments are made.
in the present state of [p173] our knowledge this means that he must
rely to a very large degree upon his own intuitions, commonsense, and
sense of life. great progress has been made in scientific psychology
within the last generation, enough progress, i think, to supplement
in important ways our own unanalyzed and intuitive wisdom about life.
but it would be idle to suppose that the science of psychology is
in a stage where it can be used as a substitute for experienced and
penetrating imaginative insight. we can be confident that on the whole
a good meteorologist can tell us more about the weather than even the
most weather-wise old sea captain. but we cannot have that kind of
confidence in even the best of psychologists. indeed, an acquaintance
with psychologists will, i think, compel anyone to admit that, if they
are good psychologists, they are almost certain to possess a gift
of insight which is unaccounted for by their technical apparatus.
doubtless it is true that in all the sciences the difference between
a good scientist and a poor one comes down at last, after all the
technical and theoretical procedure has been learned, to some sort of
residual flair for the realities of that subject. but in the study
of human nature that residual flair, which seems to be composed of
intuition, commonsense, and unconsciously deposited experience, plays a
much greater role than it does in the more advanced sciences.

the uses of psychology to the moralist are, therefore, in confirming
and correcting, in broadening and organizing, his insight into human
nature. he is confronted, of course, with a great deal of confusion.
there is, to begin with, no agreed terminology, and therefore it is
often almost impossible to know whether two psychologists [p174]
using the same word mean the same thing. anyone who has stumbled about
amidst words like instinct, impulse, consciousness, the unconscious,
will know how confusing it all is. psychologists are still using a
literary language in which the connotations of words tend to overwhelm
their precise signification. to make the confusion greater there is
the elaborate system-making, the headstrong generalizing, and the
fierce dogmatism which have produced the psychological sects. but all
of this is characteristic of a young science, and if that is borne in
mind, there is nothing disconcerting about it. the eighteenth century
in dealing with the newtonian physics, and the nineteenth in dealing
with the darwinian biology, went through a hullabaloo similar to
that which we are now going through in connection with behaviorism,
psychoanalysis, and the so-called _gestalt-theorie_. our only concern
here is to ask whether underneath all the controversy there is not some
trustworthy common ground on which the moralist can stand.

i have already said that there was common ground in the concept of
development. we can go further than that, however, and say, i think,
that with the help of psychology we are in position now to construct
reliable and useful pictures, which confirm and correct our own
intuitive understanding, of the infantile and of the mature approach
to experience. we can, as it were, fix these two poles and regard the
history of each soul as the history of its progress from infantilism
to maturity. we are by no means able as yet to describe all the phases
of development between these two poles; we know that progress is
often temporarily interrupted, often completely [p175] arrested, and
sometimes turned into a rout. but insofar as we are able to realize
clearly what a fully matured character is like, the word progress has
a meaning because we know what we mean by the goal of moral effort.
that goal is maturity. if we knew all the stages in the development to
maturity, and how to control them, we should have an adequate science
of education, we could deal successfully with functional disorders, we
should have a very great mastery of the art of life. for the problems
of education are at bottom problems in how to lead the child from one
stage of development to another until at last he becomes an harmonious
and autonomous personality; the functional disorders of the character
are problems in the fixations and repressions on the path to maturity;
the art of living is to pass gracefully from youth to old age, and, at
last, as montaigne said, to learn to die.

it is this progress which we have to understand and imaginatively to
conceive. for in conceiving it we conceive the matrix of humanism. in
this conception is to be found, i believe, the substitute for that
conception of divine government which gives shape and form to the
theocratic culture. to replace the conception of man as the subject of
a heavenly king, which dominates the whole ancestral order of life,
humanism takes as its dominant pattern the progress of the individual
from helpless infancy to self-governing maturity.


7. _the career of the soul_

if our scientific knowledge of human nature were adequate, we could
achieve in the humanistic culture that which all theologies have tried
to achieve: we could found [p176] our morality on tested truths.
they would be truths about the development of human nature, and not,
as in the popular religions, truth of physics and of history. but
our knowledge of human nature is inadequate, and therefore, like the
teachers of popular religion, we have in place of exact knowledge
to invent imaginative fictions in the hope that the progress of
science will confirm and correct, but will not utterly contradict,
our hypotheses. we can claim no more than this: for our understanding
of human nature we are compelled to use our insight and the best
available psychological science of our age, exactly as dante, for his
understanding of the divine constitution of the universe, had to use
the accepted astronomy of his day. if our psychology turns out to be
wrong, the only difference will be that we shall have to discard an
hypothesis whereas our forefathers had to discard a revealed dogma.

the sketch which i am about to make of the progress from infancy to
maturity is to be taken, then, not as tested scientific truth, but as
an imaginative construction. it will be, if you like, a modern fable
which symbolizes rather than describes, as the primitive legends of the
sun god symbolized, rather than described, the observed facts. because
it is an imaginative construction, the same meaning might be expressed
in other ways and with many variations of detail. but though the
fiction itself is of no consequence, the meaning it conveys is of the
highest consequence, and it is confirmed, as i shall attempt to show,
not only by ordinary insight but by the deepest wisdom of the greatest
teachers.

freud, in a famous paper, has described the passage [p177] from
infancy to maturity as a transition from the dominion of momentary
pleasure and pain to the dominion of reality. this theory is not
peculiar to psychoanalysis in any of its several schools, and it does
not depend upon the controverted points of doctrine. it is, in fact,
more or less of a commonplace in psychological thought. i am employing
it here because a distinguished colleague of freud’s, dr. s. ferenczi
of budapest, has made an attempt to indicate the chief stages in the
development between these two poles of experience. it is a most useful
bit of speculation, and while i believe it could be duplicated in terms
either of behaviorism or of the _gestalt-theorie_, i do not happen to
have come across any portrait of the idea which is as vivid as dr.
ferenczi’s.

the first stage of human development, says ferenczi, takes place in
the womb where the embryo lives as a parasite of the mother’s body.
an outer world exists for it only in a very restricted degree; all it
needs for protection, warmth, and nourishment is assured by the mother.
because everything is there which is necessary for the satisfaction
of the instincts, ferenczi calls this the period of unconditional
omnipotence.

it is, therefore, rather disagreeable and perhaps terrifying to be
born, for with the detachment from the mother and the “rude disturbance
of the wish-less tranquillity he had enjoyed in the womb,” the trouble
of living begins, and evokes feelings which might perhaps be described
as a longing to recover the perfect pre-natal adjustment. nurses
instinctively recognize this longing, says ferenczi, and as soon as
the infant expresses his discomfort by struggling and crying, they
deliberately create a situation [p178] which resembles as closely
as possible the one he has just left. they lay him down by the warm
body of the mother, or wrap him up in soft, warm coverings, shield his
eyes from the light and his ears from noise. the illusion is more or
less complete, for, of course, the infant is unaware of the activities
of the nurse. for all he knows “his wishes are realized simply by
imagining the satisfaction of them.” ferenczi calls this the period of
magical-hallucinatory omnipotence.

but this period does not last very long, since the nurse is unable
to anticipate every desire that the growing infant feels. “the
hallucinatory representation of the wish-fulfilment soon proves
inadequate to bring about any longer a real wish-fulfilment.” so the
infant has to give signals, and the more complicated his wishes become
the more signals he has to give. he begins to use a gesture-language,
and if there is a willing nurse always at hand without too many
new-fangled notions, the child gets what he wants for the mere trouble
of expressing his wants. ferenczi calls this the period of omnipotence
by the help of magic gestures.

but as time goes on and as the number of his wants increase these
gestures lose some of their magic. the number of the conditions
increase to which he has to submit. “the outstretched hand must often
be drawn back empty.... indeed, an invincible hostile power may
forcibly oppose itself to this gesture and compel the hand to resume
its former position.” at this point his sense of reality begins; the
sense, that is to say, of something outside himself which does not
submit to his wishes. “till now the ‘all-powerful’ being has been
able [p179] to feel himself one with the world that obliged him
and followed his every nod, but gradually there appears a painful
discordance in his experiences.” because all experiences are no longer
incorporated in the ego, ferenczi calls this the projection phase.

but though the child has now begun to discern the existence of reality,
his sense of that reality is still quite imperfect. at first, perhaps,
he regards this outer world, though it opposes his wishes, as having
qualities like his own. ferenczi calls this the animistic period.
the child then begins to talk and to substitute for gestures actual
statements of what he desires. provided he lives in a household bent on
fulfilling his wants as soon as possible, he retains to a very great
degree the illusion that his wishes are sovereign. ferenczi calls this
the period of magic thoughts and magic words.

finally, if he matures successfully, he passes into the last period
where he is no longer under the domination of the pleasure-principle:
the feeling of omnipotence gives way to the full appreciation of the
force of circumstances. now unfortunately neither freud nor ferenczi,
nor, so far as i know, any other psychoanalyst, devotes much attention
to this last phase of maturity in which the sense of reality has become
perfected. they are preoccupied with pathology; that is to say, with
the problems which arise out of a failure to attain this last stage in
which the adult makes a complete adjustment with his world because his
wishes are matured to accept the conditions which reality imposes.

yet it is this last stage which plainly constitutes the goal of moral
effect, for here alone the adult once again [p180] recovers that
harmony between himself and his environment which he lost in that
period of infancy when he first discovered that his wishes were no
longer sovereign. it is the memory of that earliest harmony which he
carries with him all his days. this is his memory of a golden age,
his intimation, as wordsworth says, of immortality. but insofar as he
expects by an infantile philosophy to recover that heaven which lay
about him in his infancy, he is doomed to disappointment. in the womb,
and for a few years of his childhood, happiness was the gratification
of his naive desires. his family arranged the world to suit his wishes.
but as he grows up, and begins to be an independent personality, this
providence ministering to his wishes disappears. he can then no longer
hope that the world will be adjusted to his wishes, and he is compelled
by a long and difficult process of learning and training to adjust his
wishes to the world. if he succeeds he is mature. if he is mature, he
is once again harmonious with the nature of things. he has virtue. and
he is happy.

the process of maturing consists then of a revision of his desires
in the light of an understanding of reality. when he is completely
infantile there is nothing in the world but his wishes. therefore, he
does not need and does not have an understanding of the outer world.
it exists for him merely as gratification or denial. but as he begins
to learn that the universe is not composed of his wishes, he begins to
see his wishes in a context and in perspective. he begins to acquire
a sense of space and to learn how much there is beyond his reach,
until at last he realizes how small a figure he is on this earth, and
how small a part of the universe is the solar system of which [p181]
ours is one of the smaller planets. he has learned a lot from the
days when he put out his hand and reached for the moon. he begins,
also, to acquire a sense of time and to realize that the moment in
which he feels the intense desire to seize something is an instant
in a lifetime, an infinitesimal point in the history of the race. he
acquires a sense of birth and decay and death, a knowledge that that
which he craves, his craving itself, and he himself who feels that
craving, did not have this craving yesterday and will no longer have
it to-morrow. he acquires a sense of cause and effect, a knowledge,
that is to say, that the sequences of events are not to be interrupted
by his preferences. he begins to discern the existence of other beings
beside himself, and to understand that they too have their preferences
and their wishes, that these wishes are often contrary to his own,
and that there is not room enough in the world, nor are there things
enough, to gratify all the wishes of everybody.

thus to learn the lessons of experience is to undergo a transvaluation
of the values we bring with us from the womb and to transmute our
naive impulses. the breakdown of the infantile adjustment in which
providential powers ministered to every wish compels us either to flee
from reality or to understand it. and by understanding it we create new
objects of desire. for when we know a good deal about a thing, know how
it originated, how it is likely to behave, what it is made of, and what
is its place amidst other things, we are dealing with something quite
different from the simple object naively apprehended.

the understanding creates a new environment. the more subtle and
discriminating, the more informed and [p182] sympathetic the
understanding is, the more complex and yet ordered do the things
about us become. to most of us, as mr. santayana once said, music is
a pleasant noise which produces a drowsy revery relieved by nervous
thrills. but the trained musician hears what we do not hear at all; he
hears the form, the structure, the pattern, and the significance of an
ideal world. a naturalist out of doors perceives a whole universe of
related life which the rest of us do not even see. a world which is
ordinarily unseen has become visible through the understanding. when
the mind has fetched it out of the flux of dumb sensations, defined
it and fixed it, this unseen world becomes more real than the dumb
sensations it supplants. when the understanding is at work, it is as if
circumstance had ceased to mutter strange sounds and had begun to speak
our language. when experience is understood, it is no longer what it is
wholly to the infant, very largely to youth, and in great measure to
most men, a succession of desirable objects at which they instinctively
grasp, interspersed with undesirable ones from which they instinctively
shrink. if objects are seen in their context, in the light of their
origin and destiny, with sympathy for their own logic and their own
purposes, they become interesting in themselves, and are no longer
blind stimuli to pleasant and unpleasant sensations.

for when our desires come into contact with the world created by
the understanding, their character is altered. they are confronted
by a much more complex stimulus which evokes a much more complex
response. instead of the naive and imperious lust of our infantile
natures which is to seize, to have and to hold, our lusts are offset
[p183] by other lusts and a balance between them is set up. that is
to say, they are made rational by the ordered variety with which the
understanding confronts them. we learn that there are more things in
heaven and earth than we dreamed of in our immature philosophy, that
there are many choices and that none is absolute, that beyond the
mountains, as the chinese say, there are people also. the obviously
pleasant or unpleasant thus becomes less obviously what we felt it
was before our knowledge of it became complicated by anticipation and
memory. the immediately desirable seems not quite so desirable and the
undesirable less intolerable. delight is perhaps not so intense nor
pain so poignant as youth and the romantics would have them. they are
absorbed into a larger experience in which the rewards are a sustained
and more even enjoyment, and serenity in the presence of inescapable
evil. in place of a world, where like children we are ministered to
by a solicitous mother, the understanding introduces us into a world
where delight is reserved for those who can appreciate the meaning and
purpose of things outside ourselves, and can make these meanings and
purposes their own.


8. _the passage into maturity_

the critical phase of human experience, then, is the passage from
childhood to maturity; the critical question is whether childish
habits and expectations are to persist or to be transformed. we grow
older. but it is by no means certain that we shall grow up. the human
character is a complicated thing, and its elements do not necessarily
march in step. it is possible to be a sage in some [p184] things and
a child in others, to be at once precocious and retarded, to be shrewd
and foolish, serene and irritable. for some parts of our personalities
may well be more mature than others; not infrequently we participate in
the enterprises of an adult with the mood and manners of a child.

the successful passage into maturity depends, therefore, on a breaking
up and reconstruction of those habits which were appropriate only to
our earliest experience.

in a certain larger sense this is the essence of education. for unless
a man has acquired the character of an adult, he is a lost soul no
matter how good his technical equipment. the world unhappily contains
many such lost souls. they are often in high places, men trained
to manipulate the machinery of civilization, but utterly incapable
of handling their own purposes in any civilized fashion. for their
purposes are merely the relics of an infancy when their wishes were
law, and they knew neither necessity nor change.

when a childish disposition is carried over into an adult environment
the result is a radically false valuation of that environment. the
symptoms are fairly evident. they may appear as a disposition to feel
that everything which happens to a man has an intentional relation to
himself; life becomes a kind of conspiracy to make him happy or to make
him miserable. in either case it is thought to be deeply concerned with
his destiny. the childish pattern appears also as a deep sense that
life owes him something, that somehow it is the duty of the universe to
look after him, and to listen sharply when he speaks to it. the notion
that the universe is full of [p185] purposes utterly unknown to him,
utterly indifferent to him, is as outrageous to one who is imperfectly
matured as would be the conduct of a mother who forgot to give a hungry
child its lunch. the childish pattern appears also as a disposition to
believe that he may reach out for anything in sight and take it, and
that having gotten it nobody must ever under any circumstances take
it away. death and decay are, therefore, almost an insult, a kind of
mischief in the nature of things, which ought not to be there, and
would not be there, if everything only behaved as good little boys
believe it should. there is indeed authority for the belief that we
are all being punished for the naughtiness of our first grandmother;
that work and trouble and death would not really be there to plague us
but for her unhappy transgression; that by rights we ought to live in
paradise and have everything we want for ever and ever.

here, too, is the source of that common complaint of the world-weary
that they are tired of their pleasures. they have what they yearned
for; yet having it they are depressed at finding that they do not care.
their inability to enjoy what they can have is the obverse of the
desire to possess the unattainable: both are due to carrying over the
expectations of youth into adult life. they find themselves in a world
unlike the world of their youth; they themselves are no longer youths.
but they retain the criteria of youth, and with them measure the world
and their own deserts.

here, too, is the origin of the apparent paradox that as men grow older
they grow wiser but sadder. it is not a paradox at all if we remember
that this wisdom which [p186] makes them sadder is, after all, an
incompleted wisdom. they have grown wiser as to the character of the
world, wiser too about their own powers, but they remain naive as to
what they may expect of the world and themselves. the expectations
which they formed in their youth persist as deeply ingrained habits
to worry them in their maturity. they are only partially matured;
they have become only partially wise. they have acquired skill and
information, but the parts of them which are adult are embedded in
other parts of their natures which are childish. for men do not
necessarily mature altogether and in unison; they learn to do this
and that more easily than they learn what to like and what to reject.
intelligence is often more completely educated than desire; our outward
behavior has an appearance of being grown up which our inner vanities
and hopes, our dim but powerful cravings, often belie. in a word, we
learn the arts and the sciences long before we learn philosophy.

if we ask ourselves what is this wisdom which experience forces upon
us, the answer must be that we discover the world is differently
constituted than we had supposed it to be. it is not that we learn more
about its physical elements, or its geography, or the variety of its
inhabitants, or the ways in which human society is governed. knowledge
of this sort can be taught to a child without in any fundamental way
disturbing his childishness. in fact, all of us are aware that we once
knew a great many things which we have since forgotten. the essential
discovery of maturity has little if anything to do with information
about the names, the locations, and the sequences of facts; it is the
acquiring of a different sense [p187] of life, a different kind of
intuition about the nature of things.

a boy can take you into the open at night and show you the stars;
he might tell you no end of things about them, conceivably all that
an astronomer could teach. but until and unless he feels the vast
indifference of the universe to his own fate, and has placed himself
in the perspective of cold and illimitable space, he has not looked
maturely at the heavens. until he has felt this, and unless he can
endure this, he remains a child, and in his childishness he will
resent the heavens when they are not accommodating. he will demand
sunshine when he wishes to play, and rain when the ground is dry, and
he will look upon storms as anger directed at him, and the thunder as a
personal threat.

the discovery that our wishes have little or no authority in the world
brings with it experience of the necessity that is in the nature of
things. the lesson of this experience is one from which we shrink and
to which few ever wholly accommodate themselves. the world of the child
is a kind of enchanted island. the labor that went into procuring his
food, his clothes, his toys, is wholly invisible at first. his earliest
expectations are, therefore, that somehow the lord will provide. only
gradually does the truth come home to him how much effort it costs to
satisfy his wants. it takes even longer for him to understand that not
only does he not get what he wants by asking for it but he cannot be
sure to get what he wants by working for it. it is not easy to accept
the knowledge that desire, that prayer, that effort can be and often
are frustrated, that in the nature of things [p188] there is much
fumbling, trial and error, deadlock and defeat.

the sense of evil is acquired late; by many persons it is never
acquired at all. children suffer, and childhood is by no means so
unreservedly happy as some make it out to be. but childish suffering
is not inherently tragic. it is not stamped with the irrevocability
which the adult feels to be part of the essence of evil. evil for the
child is something which can be explained away, made up for, done away
with. pretentious philosophies have been built on this fancy purporting
somehow to absorb the evil of the world in an all-embracing goodness,
as a child’s tears are dried by its mother’s kisses. the discovery that
there is evil which is as genuine as goodness, that there is ugliness
and violence which are no less real than joy and love, is one of those
discoveries that the adult is forced somehow to accept in his valuation
of experience.

and then there is the knowledge, which only experience can give, that
everything changes and that everything comes to an end. it is possible
to tell a child about mortality, but to realize it he must live long
enough to experience it. this knowledge does not come from words; it
comes in feeling, in the feeling that he himself is older, in the
death of kin and friends, in seeing well-known objects wear out, in
discarding old things, in awakening to the sense that there is a whole
new generation in the world which looks upon him as old. there is an
intimation of immortality in our youth because we have not yet had
experience of mortality. the persons and the things which surround us
seem eternal because [p189] we have known them too briefly to realize
that they change. we have seen neither their beginning nor their end.

in the last analysis we have no right to say that the world of youth is
an illusion. for the child it is a true picture of the world in that
it corresponds to, and is justified in, his experience. if he did not
have to grow older, it would be quite sufficient because nothing in his
experience would contradict it. our sense of life as we mature is quite
different, but there is no reason to think that it has any absolute
finality. perhaps if we lived several hundred years we should acquire
a wholly different sense of life, compared with which all our adult
philosophy would seem quite callow.

the child’s sense of life can be called an illusion only if it is
carried over into manhood, for then it ceases to fit his experience and
to be justified by events. the habits formed in a childish environment
become progressively unworkable and contradictory as the youth is
thrust out from the protection of his family into an adult environment.
then the infantile conviction that his wants will somehow be met
collides with the fact that he must provide for himself. the world
begins to seem out of joint. the child’s notion that things are to be
had for the asking becomes a vast confusion in which words are treated
as laws, and rhetoric as action. the childish belief that each of us is
the center of an adoring and solicitous universe becomes the source of
endless disappointments because we cannot reconcile what we feel is due
us with what we must resign ourselves to. the sense of the unreality of
evil, which our earliest experience seemed to justify, [p190] becomes
a deep preference for not knowing the truth, an habitual desire to
think of the world as we should prefer it to be; out of this rebellion
against truth, out of this determination that the facts shall conform
to our wishes, are born all manner of bigotry and uncharitableness.
the child’s sense that things do not end, that they are there forever,
becomes, once it is carried over into maturity, a vain and anxious
effort to possess things forever. the incapacity to realize that
the objects of desire will last only a little while makes us put an
extravagant value upon them, and to care for them, not as they are and
for what they can actually give us, but for what we foolishly insist
they ought to be and ought always to give us.

the child’s philosophy rests upon the assumption that the world outside
is in gear with his own appetites. for this reason an adult with a
childish character will ascribe an authority to his appetites which may
easily land him in fanaticism or frustration, in a crazy indulgence
or a miserable starvation. and to the environment he will ascribe a
willingness to conform to him, a capacity to be owned by him, which
land him in all sorts of delusions of grandeur. only the extreme
cases are in the asylums. the world is full of semi-adult persons who
secretly nurse the notion that they are, or that by rights they ought
to be, don juan, crœsus, napoleon, or the messiah.

they have brought with them the notion that they are still as
intimately attached to nature and to society as the child is to its
household. the adult has to break this attachment to persons and
things. his world does not permit him to remain fused with it, but
compels him to stand away from things. for things no longer obey
[p191] his wishes. and therefore he cannot let his wishes become
too deeply involved in things. he can no longer count on possessing
whatever he may happen to want. and therefore he must learn to want
what he can possess. he can no longer hold forever the things at which
he grasps; for they change, and slip away. and therefore he must
learn to hold on to things which do not slip away and change, to hold
on to things not by grasping them, but by understanding them and by
remembering them. then he is wholly an adult. then he has conquered
mortality in the only way mortal men can conquer it. for he has ceased
to expect anything of the world which it cannot give, and he has
learned to love it under the only aspect in which it is eternal.


9. _the function of high religion_

in the light of this conception of maturity as the ultimate phase
in the development of the human personality, we are, i think, in
a position to understand the riddle which we set ourselves at the
beginning of this chapter. i asked what significance there was for us
in the fact that men have so persistently associated the good life
with some form of ascetic discipline and renunciation. the answer is
that asceticism is an effort to overcome immaturity. when men do not
outgrow their childish desires, they seek to repress them. the ascetic
discipline, if it is successful, is a form of education; if it is
unsuccessful, it is an agonized conflict due to an imperfect education
or an incapacity to grow up. by the same token, moral regulations
imposed on others, insofar as they are at all rational, and not methods
of exploitation or expressions of jealousy, are attempts to curb the
social disorders [p192] which result from the activities of grown-up
children.

it follows that asceticisms and moralities are at best means to an
end; they are more or less inadequate substitutes for the educational
process and the natural growth of wisdom. they are often confused
with virtue, but they are not virtue. for virtue is the quality of
mature desire, and when desire is mature the tortures of renunciations
and of prohibitions have ceased to be necessary. “blessedness,” says
spinoza, “is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself; nor should
we rejoice in it for that we restrain our lusts, but, on the contrary,
because we rejoice therein we can restrain our lusts.” the mature
character may be attained by growth and experience and insight, or by
ascetic discipline, or by that process of being reborn which is called
conversion; when it is attained, the moral problem of whether to yield
to impulse or to check it, and how much to check it and how much to
yield, has disappeared. a mature desire is innocent. this, i think, is
the final teaching of the great sages. “to him who has finished the
path, and passed beyond sorrow, who has freed himself on all sides,
and thrown away every fetter, there is no more fever of grief,” says a
buddhist writer.

  the master said,

  “at fifteen i had my mind bent on learning.

  “at thirty, i stood firm.

  “at forty, i had no doubts.

  “at fifty, i knew the decrees of heaven.

  “at sixty, my ear was an obedient organ for the reception of truth.

  “at seventy, i could follow what my heart desired, without
  transgressing what was right.”

[p193] to be able, as confucius indicates, to follow what the heart
desires without coming into collision with the stubborn facts of life
is the privilege of the utterly innocent and of the utterly wise. it is
the privilege of the infant and of the sage who stand at the two poles
of experience; of the infant because the world ministers to his heart’s
desire and of the sage because he has learned what to desire. perhaps
this is what jesus meant when he told his followers that they must
become like little children.

if this is what he meant, and if this is what buddha, confucius, and
spinoza meant, then we have here the clue to the function of high
religion in human affairs. i venture, at least, to suggest that the
function of high religion is to reveal to men the quality of mature
experience, that high religion is a prophecy and an anticipation of
what life is like when desire is in perfect harmony with reality. it
announces the discovery that men can enter into the realm of the spirit
when they have outgrown all childishness.




chapter x [p194]

high religion and the modern world


1. _popular religion and the great teachers_

in popular thought it is taken for granted that to be religious is to
accept in some form or other the theocratic view that god governs the
universe. if that assumption is correct then the orthodox who inveigh
against the godlessness of contemporary thought and the militant
atheists who rejoice in this godlessness are both right when they
insist that religion is disappearing. insofar as religion is identical
with a belief in theocracy, it has indeed lost much of its reality for
modern men.

there is little doubt, i think, that popular religion has been
always and everywhere theocratic in principle. if, then, we are to
define as religion that which the overwhelming majority of mankind
have cherished, it would be necessary to concede at once that the
dissolution of the belief in a supernatural government of human affairs
is a dissolution of religion itself. but if that is conceded, then it
is necessary to concede also that many whom the world recognizes as
its greatest religious teachers were not themselves religious men. for
it could be demonstrated, i think, that in the central intuition of
aristotle, of the author of the fourth gospel, of buddha, of spinoza,
to name only originating minds, the theocratic principle is irrelevant.
no one of these teachers held the belief, [p195] which is at the
heart of theocratic religion, that the relationship between god and
man is somehow analogous with that of a king to his subjects, that
the relationship is in any sense a transaction between personalities
involving, however subtly, a quid pro quo, that god’s will and the
human will are interacting forces.

in place of the popular conception of religion as a matter of
commandments and obedience, reward and punishment, in a word, as a
form of government, these great teachers placed their emphasis upon
the conversion, the education, and the discipline of the human will.
such beliefs as they had about god were not in the nature of oaths of
allegiance to a superior; their concern was not to placate the will of
god but to alter the will of man. this alteration of the human will
they conceived as good not because god commands it, but because it
is intrinsically good for man, because by the test of experience it
yields happiness, serenity, whole-heartedness. belief is not, as it is
in popular religion, an act which by creating a claim upon divinity
insures man’s salvation; the force of belief, as mr. whitehead has put
it, is in “cleansing the inward parts.” thus religion becomes “the art
and the theory of the internal life of man, so far as it depends on the
man himself and on what is permanent in the nature of things.”

the difference between religion conceived as the art and theory of
the internal life of man and religion conceived as cosmic government
is the great difference between the religion of these great sages and
the religion of the multitude. though in matters of this kind the
distinction is not always absolutely clear in every case, [p196] on
the whole it cannot be disputed, i believe, that the difference is real
and of fundamental importance. if we observe popular religions as they
are administered by ecclesiastical establishments, it is overwhelmingly
plain that their main appeal rests upon the belief that through their
offices the devout are able to obtain eternal salvation, and even
earthly favors, from an invisible king. but if we observe truly, i
think, we shall see also that side by side with the popular religion,
sometimes in open conflict with it, sometimes in outward conformity
with it, there is generally to be found in cultivated communities a
minority to whom religion is primarily a reconditioning of their own
souls. they may be mystics like eckhart, they may be platonists like
origen or dean inge, they may be protestants like st. augustine and
luther in certain phases of their thought, they may be humanists like
erasmus and montaigne; as of confucius, it may be said of them that
“the subjects on which the master did not talk were: extraordinary
things, feats of strength, disorder, and spiritual beings.” they may
be inside the churches or outside them, but in intention, in the inner
meaning of their religion, they are wholly at variance with the popular
creeds. for in one form or another they reject the idea of attaining
salvation by placating god; in one form or another they regard
salvation as a condition of the soul which is reached only by some kind
of self-discipline.

it must be obvious that religion, conceived in this way, “as the art
and theory of the internal life of man,” is not dissolved by what i
have been calling the acids of modernity. it is the popular religion
which is dissolved. [p197] but just because this vast dissolution is
destroying the disposition to believe in a theocratic government of
the universe, just because men no longer find it wholly credible that
their affairs are subject to the ordinances of a heavenly king, just
because they no longer vividly believe in an invisible power which
regulates their lives, judges them, and sustains them, their only hope
of salvation lies in a religion which provides an internal discipline.

the real effect of modernity upon religion, therefore, is to make the
religion which was once the possession of an aristocracy of the spirit
the only possible kind of religion for all modern men.


2. _the aristocratic principle_

to those who want salvation cheap, and most men do, there is very
little comfort to be had out of the great teachers. spinoza might have
been speaking for all of them when he said:

  if the way which i have pointed out ... seems exceedingly hard, it
  may nevertheless be discovered. needs must it be hard, since it is
  so seldom found. how would it be possible, if salvation were ready
  to our hand, and could without great labor be found, that it should
  be by almost all men neglected? but all things excellent are as
  difficult as they are rare.

but why, we may ask, is salvation by almost all men neglected? the
answer is that they do not desire that which they have never learned to
desire. “one cannot,” as voltaire said, “desire that which one does not
know.” can a man love good wine when he has drunk nothing but ginger
beer? did we have naturally and instinctively [p198] a taste for
that which constitutes the happiness of the saved, we should already
be saved, and their happiness would be ours. we lack the taste, which
is, i suppose, another way of saying what the theologians meant when
they spoke of original sin. to be saved, in the sense which the sages
had in mind, is by conversion, education, and self-discipline to have
achieved a certain quality and harmony of the passions. then the good
life is possible. but although men have often heard this said, and have
read about it, unless in some measure they already desire it, the whole
teaching remains mere words and abstractions which are high, cold,
and remote. as long as they feel that the way to happiness is through
a will other than their own, and that somehow events can in this
fashion be made to yield to their unregenerate wishes, in this world or
another, the wisdom of the sages will not touch their hearts, and the
way which is pointed out will be neglected.

wisdom will seem inhuman. in a sense it is inhuman, for it is so
uncommon. those who have it speak a strange language, of which the
words perhaps have a familiar sound, but the meaning is too high and
abstract; their delights are strange delights, and unfathomable, like
a passion which we have never known. and if we encounter them in their
lives or in their writings, they seem to us a mixture of grandeur
and queerness. for they are at once more deeply at home in the world
than the transients who make up most of mankind; yet, because of the
quality of their passions, they are not wholly of the world as the
worldling understands it. but unless the worldling is entirely without
the capacity to transcend himself, he is [p199] bound in such an
encounter to catch a glimpse now and then of an experience where there
is a serenity he himself has never known, a peace that passes his
understanding, an ecstasy exquisite and without regret, and happiness
so clarified that it seems like brilliant and kindly light.

yet no teacher has ever appeared in the world who was wise enough
to know how to teach his wisdom to all mankind. in fact, the great
teachers have attempted nothing so utopian. they were quite well aware
how difficult for most men is wisdom, and they have confessed frankly
that the perfect life was for a select few. it is arguable, in fact,
that the very idea of teaching the highest wisdom to all men is the
recent notion of a humanitarian and romantically democratic age, and
that it is quite foreign to the thought of the greatest teachers.
gautama buddha, for example, abolished caste within the religious
order which he founded, and declared that the path to nirvana was open
to the lowest outcast as well as to the proudest brahman. but it was
necessary to enter the order and submit to its stringent discipline.
it is obvious that buddha never believed that very many could or would
do that. jesus, whom we are accustomed to think of as wholly catholic
in his sympathies, spoke the bitter words: “give not what is holy to
the dogs and cast not your pearls before swine.” in mohammedanism that
which is mystical is esoteric: “all those emotions are meant only for
a small number of chosen ones ... even some of the noblest minds in
islam restrict true religious life to an aristocracy, and accept the
ignorance of the multitude as an irremediable evil.”

there is an aristocratic principle in all the religions [p200] which
have attained wide acceptance. it is significant that jesus was content
to leave the governance of the mass of men to caesar, and that he
created no organization during his lifetime beyond the appointment
of the apostles. it is significant, because it shows how much more
he was concerned with the few who could be saved than with arranging
the affairs of the mass of mankind. plato, who was a more systematic
teacher than either jesus or buddha, did work out an elaborate social
order which took account not only of the philosophers, but of all the
citizens of the state. but in that very attempt he rested upon the
premise that most men will not attain the good life, and that for
them it is necessary to institute the laws. “the worthy disciples of
philosophy will be but a small remnant,” he said, “... the guardian ...
must be required to take the longer circuit, and toil at learning as
well as at gymnastics, or he will never reach the highest knowledge of
all which is his proper calling.”

perhaps because they looked upon the attempts as hopeless, perhaps
because they did not know how to go about it, perhaps because they
were so wise, the greatest teachers have never offered their full
wisdom to the multitude. like mr. valiant-for-truth in _the pilgrim’s
progress_ they said: “my sword i give to him that shall succeed me in
my pilgrimage, and my courage and skill to him that can get it.”


3. _the peculiarity of the modern situation_

but because the teaching of the sages was incomprehensible, the
multitude, impressed but also bewildered, ignored them as teachers and
worshipped them as gods. [p201] in their wisdom the people were not
interested, but in the legends of their power, which rumor created,
there was something understandable. and thus, the religions which have
been organized around the names of great spiritual teachers have been
popular in proportion, one might almost say, to the degree in which the
original insight into the necessity for conversion and self-discipline
has been reduced to a system of commands and promises which the common
man can understand.

for popular religion is suited to the capacities of the unconverted.
the adherents of a popular religion necessarily include an enormous
number of people who are too young, or too feeble, too dull or too
violent, too unstable or too incurious, to have any comprehension
whatsoever of anything but the simplest scheme of rewards and
punishments. an organized religion cannot neglect them if it has any
pretensions to being universal. the great ecclesiastical establishments
have often sheltered spiritual lives, and drawn new vitality from
them. but fundamentally the great churches are secular institutions;
they are governments preoccupied inevitably with the regulation of
the unregenerate appetites of mankind. in their scriptures there is
to be found the teaching that true salvation depends upon internal
reform of desire. but since this reform is so very difficult, in
practice the churches have devoted themselves not so much to making
real conversions, as to governing the dispositions of the unconverted
multitude.

they are immensely engaged by the task of administering their moral
codes, persuading their congregations with promises, and threatening
them with punishments [p202] if they do not keep their childish
lusts within bounds. the fact that they use rewards and punishments,
and appeal even to caesar, is evidence enough that they are dealing
with the unconverted. the fact that they invoke authority is in
itself evidence that they are speaking to the naive. the fact that
they pretend to have certain knowledge about the constitution of the
universe is evidence that they are interested in those who are not wise
enough to understand the limitations of knowledge. for to the few who
are converted, goodness is pleasant, and needs no sanctions. it needs
no authority, for it has been verified by experience. but when men have
to be coerced into goodness, it is plain that they do not care for it.

now although the great teachers saw clearly enough the difference
between the popular religion and their own insight, they were under
no great compulsion to try and overcome it. they accepted the fact
that the true religion was esoteric and for the few. they saw that it
demanded the re-education of desire, but they had no systematic and
tested knowledge of how new habits can be formed. invincible as was
their insight into the principle of happiness, they were compelled
to depend upon introspection, and to generalize from a limited
observation. they understood that the good life was in some degree an
acquired disposition; they were aware that it is not easily or naively
acquired.

for those who somehow had the disposition, the teachers instituted
stern disciplines which were really primitive experiments in the
re-education of desire. but there was no very urgent practical need
which impelled them to search for ways of making disciplines more
[p203] widely available. those who submitted to them were in general
individuals who were already out of the ordinary. the mass of mankind
lived solidly within the framework of custom and the psychological
compulsions of theocracy. there was no pressing reason, as there is
to-day, now that this ancestral order is dissolved, why anyone should
seek to formulate a mode of life by which ordinary men, thrown upon
their own resources, can find their way without supernatural rules,
commands, punishments, and compensations. in the past there were a
few men here and there who had somehow, for reasons which we do not
understand, outgrown the ancestral society in which they lived. but the
society itself remained. it sheltered them. and it ruled the many.

the peculiarity of our modern situation is that multitudes, instead of
a few, are compelled to make radical and original adjustments. these
multitudes, though they have lost the ancient certainties, have not
outgrown the needs to which they ministered. they need to believe,
but they cannot. they need to be commanded, but they cannot find a
commander. they need support, and there is none. their situation is
adult, but their dispositions are not. the religion of the spirit would
suit their needs, but it would seem to be beyond their powers.


4. _the stone which the builders rejected_

the way of life which i have called high religion has in all ages
seemed so unapproachably high that it has been reserved for a voluntary
aristocracy of the spirit. it has, in fact, been looked upon not only
as a kind of splendid idiosyncrasy of a few men here and there, but
[p204] as incompatible, in essence, with the practical conditions
under which life is lived. it is for these reasons, no doubt, that
the practice of high religion has almost invariably been associated
either with a solitary asceticism or with a specially organized life in
monastic establishments. high religion has been regarded as something
separate from the main concerns of mankind.

it is not difficult to see why this was so if we realize that the
insight into the value of disinterestedness, which is the core of high
religion, was not a sudden discovery nor a complete one, anywhere or
any time. like all other things associated with evolutionary man, this
insight must have had very crude beginnings; it would be possible
to show, i think, that there have been many tentative and partial
perceptions of it which, under the clarifying power of men of genius,
have at times become coherent. when we remember that we are dealing
with an insight into the qualities of a matured personality, there is
no reason to suppose that the full significance of this insight has
ever been completely exhausted. it seems far more likely that the sages
demonstrated the existence of the realm of the spirit, but that it
still remains to be thoroughly explored.

if that is true then the attempt to live by these partial insights
must necessarily have presented inordinate practical difficulties.
pythagoras, for example, seems to have grasped the idea that the
disinterested study of mathematics and music was cleansing to the
passions and also that in order to be disinterested it was necessary
to have purity of mind. so when he established his society in southern
italy he evidently attempted to combine the [p205] serious pursuit
of science with an ascetic discipline. but the pursuit of science was
too much for the mass of the faithful who assumed that “to follow
pythagoras meant to go barefoot and to abstain from animal flesh and
beans.” and this in turn was too much for the dignity of the learned
who proceeded to dissociate themselves from the disciplinary aspect of
the pythagorean teaching. it is a fair conclusion, i think, that the
breakdown of this early experiment must have been due fundamentally to
the fact that pythagoras could not have known any tested method either
of equipping his followers to appreciate science or anything beside a
crude asceticism as a means of moral discipline. if this is true, then
the reason for the failure lay in the fact that though the original
insight was marvelously good, it was not implemented with the necessary
technical knowledge for applying it. only a few, we may suppose, who
were already by the accidents of nature and nurture suited to the
pythagorean ideal, can ever have successfully applied it.

in the christian pursuit of the higher religious life the practical
difficulties presented themselves in a different way. in its beginning
christianity was a sect of obscure men and women who were out of
touch with the intellectual interests of the roman world. they were
persecuted aliens both in palestine and elsewhere, and they came to
the conclusion that the roman empire and all its concerns was the
kingdom of satan. this, together with the widespread belief in the
second coming of christ, dissociated the christian life at the outset
from the life of the world. later on, when christianity became the
official religion of the empire, and the church a great [p206] secular
institution which concerned itself with government and property and
diplomacy and war, those who wished to live as nearly as possible
according to the original meaning of the gospels were quite evidently
compelled to withdraw and live a separated life. “if any man love the
world, the love of the father is not in him. for all that is in the
world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride
of life, is not of the father, but is of the world. and the world
passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of god
abideth forever.”

although for some centuries the monasteries were the centers of what
learning there was, the impressions left by monasticism on mankind
seems to have been that the highest type of religious life is not
disinterested in human affairs, but uninterested; that it requires not
merely the renunciation of worldly desires, but of the world itself.
the insight was imperfect, and therefore as an example to mankind the
practice was abortive and confusing. yet only an uncomprehending person
can fail to see that the vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience
proceeded from a profound, if partial, understanding of human nature
and its most perfect harmony. plainly all manner of disorder both in
society and in the individual result from greed, uncontrollable sexual
desire, arrogance, and imperiousness. that was so plain to the early
christians, and on the other hand it was so little plain how those
powerful passions could be civilized, that the monastics in effect gave
up and attempted to excise them entirely from their natures. in this
they did not succeed.

had they known any way of curing the fever of human [p207] passion
except by attempting to excise it, the insight of high religion would
have had some practicable meaning for those who did not withdraw from
the world. but no way was known, and therefore the practice of high
religion had to mean separation from human society and violence to
human nature. but why was there no other way known of overcoming the
chaos of the passions? was it because there is no other way? if that
were so then the world is as hopeless as the early christians thought
it was; indeed it is more hopeless because it does not show any signs,
as they believed, of coming to an end. was it because the early
christian fathers were not wise enough to discover a way? it is always
a good rule, i think, to discard any idea based on the premise that the
best minds of another age were congenitally inferior to our own. my
conviction is that necessity is the mother of discovery and invention,
and that the reason why the insight of high religion and the methods
of practicing it were so imperfectly developed, is that there was no
practical necessity for developing them.

the mass of men lived in an ancestral order which was regulated by
custom and authority, and made endurable by usage and compensatory
consolations. the organic quality of that society into which they
fitted took care of their passions; those who had outgrown such a
society, or were so constituted that they did not fit it, were the
exceptions. from them came the insight of high religion; for them a
separated life was a possible solution of their personal problems.
there was nothing in the nature of things to compel men to work out a
way of life, i won’t say for all men, but at least for many men, by
which [p208] they could govern their own natures. behind any such
effort there would almost certainly have to be an urgent need. for the
inertia of the human race is immense.

it is my thesis that because the acids of modernity have dissolved
the adjustments of the ancestral order, there exists to-day on a
scale never before experienced by mankind and of an urgency without a
parallel, the need for that philosophy of life of which the insight
of high religion is a prophecy. for it is immature and unregenerate
desire which creates the disorders and the frustrations that confound
us. the preoccupation of the popular religion has been to find a way of
governing these disorders and of compensating for their frustrations.
the preoccupation of high religion is with the regeneration of the
passions that create the disorders and the frustrations. insofar as
modernity has dissolved the power of the popular religion to govern
and to compensate, the need for a high religion which regenerates
becomes imperative, and what was once a kind of spiritual luxury of the
few has, under modern conditions, become an urgent necessity of the
many. the insight of high religion which has hitherto indicated a kind
of bypath into rare experiences is now a trail which the leaders of
mankind are compelled to take.

there is implied in this a radical displacement in the field of morals.
the main interest of the practical moralist in the past has been to
interpret, administer, and enforce a moral code. he knew what was
right. the populace acknowledged that he knew what was right. his
task was to persuade and compel them to do what was right. there was
a tacit assumption, which was [p209] quite correct, that very often
the populace and even the moralist himself would much rather have done
what was wrong. very often they did it. then they were punished in
this world or in the next. but to-day the moralist finds himself in
a different position. he is no longer absolutely sure that he knows
what is right. the populace, even if it respects him, is disinclined
to believe that a thing is right simply because he says it is. the
populace continues very frequently to prefer what was once regarded
as wrong. it no longer knows whether it is right or wrong, and of
course it gives itself the benefit of the doubt. the result is that
there no longer exists a moral code which the moralist can interpret,
administer, and enforce. the effect of that is moral anarchy within
and without. since there is no principle under modern conditions which
authorizes the re-establishment of a moral code, the moralist, unless
he revises his premises, becomes entirely ineffectual. to revise his
premises can, under the circumstances, mean only one thing: that he
occupies himself with the problem of how to encourage that growth
into maturity, that outgrowing of naive desire, that cultivation of
disinterestedness, which render passion innocent and an authoritative
morality unnecessary.

the novelty of all this lies in the fact that the guardians of morality
among the people are compelled at last to take seriously what the
teachers of wisdom have taught. the insight of high religion may
be said, then, to be a discovery in the field of human experience
comparable with those prophetic conceptions in the natural sciences
which, after being looked upon for long periods as a [p210] curiosity,
are at last, because circumstances are ripe, seen to be the clue
to otherwise insoluble perplexities. the concept of evolution was
discovered by sheer insight innumerable times before the time of
darwin. not much came of it until the rapid evolution of human affairs
after the industrial revolution had somehow brought this neglected
insight into focus with men’s interests. there are many conceptions in
the science of the greeks which are true intimations of what modern
physicists have found. but an insight of this sort comes into its own
only when circumstances conspire to make it inevitably appropriate.
it is my contention that in the field of morals circumstances are
producing a somewhat analogous condition: that the insight of the sages
into the value of disinterestedness has become the clue to otherwise
insoluble perplexities.




                            part iii [p211]

                        the genius of modernity

                _where is the way where light dwelleth?_
                                                 job 38:19.




chapter xi [p213]

the cure of souls


1. _the problem of evil_

the greatest of all perplexities in theology has been to reconcile the
infinite goodness of god with his omnipotence. nothing puts a greater
strain upon the faith of the common man than the existence of utterly
irrational suffering in the universe, and the problem which tormented
job still troubles every devout and thoughtful man who beholds the
monstrous injustices of nature. if there were no pain in the world
except that which was felt by responsible beings who had knowingly
transgressed some law of conduct, there would, of course, be no problem
of evil. pain would be nothing but a rational punishment. but the pain
which is suffered by those who according to all human standards are
innocent, by children and by animals, for example, cannot be fitted
into any rational theory of reward and punishment. it never has been.
the classic attempts to solve the problem of evil invariably falsify
the premises. this falsification may for a time satisfy the inquirer,
but it does not settle the problem. that is why the problem is forever
presenting itself again.

the solutions which have been proposed neglect one or the other of the
attributes of god: tacitly or otherwise either his infinite power or
his infinite love is denied. [p214] in the old testament, at least
in the older parts of it, the power of god is exalted at the expense
of his goodness. for it is simply impossible by any human standard
and within any intelligible meaning of the words to regard yahveh as
wholly good. his cruelty is notorious and his capriciousness is that
of an oriental despot. it is admitted, i believe, by all but the most
literally-minded of the fundamentalists that there are innumerable
incidents in the old testament which have to be expurgated if the bible
is to be used as a source book of conduct for impressionable children.
now for the ancient hebrews who conceived god in their fashion, the
problem of evil did not exist because it had not occurred to them that
a ruler should be just and good as well as great and powerful.

as men came to believe that god must be just, beneficent, and loving,
the problem soon presented itself. and in the book of job, which is
supposed to date from the fifth or fourth century b.c., we have a
poignant effort to solve it. job’s conclusion is that the goodness of
jehovah is among the “things too wonderful for me.” he accepts the
judgments of god, and acknowledges their goodness by attributing to god
a kind of goodness which is unlike the human conception of goodness.
he holds fast to the premise that god is omnipotent—“i know that thou
canst do all things”—and the other premise that god is beneficent
he redefines. job’s mind was satisfied, and it is reported that he
prospered greatly thereafter. what had really happened was that job
gave up the attempt to prove that god was like job, that the world was
as job wished it to be, and so piously and with his mind at [p215]
rest he made the best of things, and went about his affairs.

in job the solution is reached by claiming that what seems evil to
us would really be recognized as goodness if our minds were not so
limited. to the naive this is no solution at all, for it depends
upon using the word ‘good’ in two senses; actually it was a perfect
solution, for job had resigned himself to the fact that god and the
universe in which he was manifest are not controlled by human desires.
those who refused to accept this solution involved themselves in
intricate theorizing. some of them argued that evil is an illusion.
this theory has been widely held, though it is rather difficult to
see how, if evil is an illusion, good is not also an illusion. the
one seems as vividly real as the other. it has also been argued by
some that evil is not important. this, of course, does not solve the
theoretical problem. in fact it ignores the problem and is really
a piece of advice as to how men ought to conduct themselves in the
presence of god. many have argued, also, that evil exists in the world
to test human character, that by bearing it and conquering it men prove
their worth. there is a core of truth in this observation as there is
in the theory that many things are not so bad as they seem. but it does
not explain why a good and all powerful deity chose to make men go
through a school of suffering to achieve goodness, when he might have
created them good in the first place.

these theoretical difficulties have furnished the material for endless
debate. i shall not pursue the matter in all its intricacies, but i
venture to point out that what is attempted in all these solutions is
ultimately to make plain [p216] why the ruler of the universe does
not order things as we should order them if we had his power. once
we confess, as job finally did, that the plan of the universe is not
what we naively wish it would be, there is no problem of evil. for the
whole difficulty arises because of our desire to impute to the universe
itself, or to the god who rules it, purposes like our own; failing to
find them, we are disappointed, and are plunged into elaborate and
interminable debate.

the final insight of job, though it seems to be consistent with the
orthodox popular religion, is really wholly inconsistent with the
inwardness of popular religion. the god of the book of job does not
minister to human desires, and the story of job is really the story
of a man’s renunciation of the belief in such a god. it is the story
of how a man learned to accept life maturely. the god whose ways job
finally acknowledges is no longer a projection of job’s desires. he is
like the god of spinoza who cannot be cajoled into returning the love
of his worshipper. he is, in short, the god of an impersonal reality.

whether god is conceived as a creator of that reality, who administers
it inexorably, or whether he is identified with reality and is
conceived as the sum total of its laws, or whether, as in the language
of modern science, the name of god is not employed at all, is a matter
of metaphysical taste. the great divide lies between those who think
their wishes are of more than human significance and those who do
not. for these latter the problem of evil does not arise out of the
difficulty of reconciling the existence of evil with their assumptions.
they do not assume that reality must conform to human desire. the
[p217] problem for them is wholly practical. it is the problem of how
to remove evil and of how to bear the evil which cannot be removed.

thus from the attempt to explain the ways of god in the world as it now
is, nature and human nature being what they are, the center of interest
is shifted to an attempt to discover ways of equipping man to conquer
evil. this displacement has in fact taken place in the modern world.
in their actual practice men do not try to account for evil in order
that they may accept it; they do not deny evil in order that they may
not have to account for it; they explain it in order that they may deal
with it.


2. _superstition and self-consciousness_

this change of attitude toward evil is not, as at first perhaps it
may seem, merely a new way of talking about the same thing. it alters
radically the nature of evil itself. for evil is not a quality of
things as such. it is a quality of our relation to them. a dissonance
in music is unpleasant only to a musical ear. pain is an evil only if
someone suffers, and there are those to whom pain is pleasure and most
men’s evil their good. for things are neutral and evil is a certain way
of experiencing them.

to realize this is to destroy the awfulness of evil. i use the word
‘awful’ in its exact sense, and i mean that in abandoning the notion
that evil has to be reconciled with a theory of how the world is
governed, we rob it of universal significance. we deflate it. the
psychological consequences are enormous, for a very great part of all
human suffering lies not in the pain itself, but in the [p218] anxiety
contributed by the meaning which we attach to it. lucretius understood
this quite well, and in his superb argument against the fear of death
he reasoned that death has no terror because nothing can be terrible to
those who no longer exist. before we were born, he says, “we felt no
distress when the poeni from all sides came together to do battle....
for he whom evil is to befall, must in his own person exist at the
very time it comes, if the misery and suffering are haply to have any
place at all.” st. thomas defines superstition as the vice of excess
in religion, and in this sense of the word it may be said that the
effect of the modern approach is to take evils out of the context of
superstition.

they cease to be signs and portents symbolizing the whole of human
destiny and become specific and distinguishable situations which have
to be dealt with. the effect of this is not only to limit drastically
the meaning, and therefore the dreadfulness, of any evil, but to
substitute for a general sense of evil an analytical estimate of
particular evils. they are then seen to be of long duration and of
short, preventable, curable, or inevitable. as long as all evils are
believed somehow to fit into a divine, if mysterious, plan, the effort
to eradicate them must seem on the whole futile, and even impious.
the history of medical progress offers innumerable instances of how
men have resisted the introduction of sanitary measures because they
dreaded to interfere with the providence of god. it is still felt, i
believe, in many quarters, even in medical circles, that to mitigate
the labor pains in childbirth is to blaspheme against the commandment
that in pain children shall be brought forth. an aura of dread [p219]
surrounds evil as long as evil situations remain entangled with a
theory of divine government.

the realization that evil exists only because we feel it to be
painful helps us not only to dissociate it from this aura of dread
but to dissociate ourselves from our own feelings about it. this is a
momentous achievement in the inner life of man. to be able to observe
our own feelings as if they were objective facts, to detach ourselves
from our own fears, hates, and lusts, to examine them, name them,
identify them, understand their origin, and finally to judge them, is
somehow to rob them of their imperiousness. they are no longer the same
feelings. they no longer dominate the whole field of consciousness.
they seem no longer to command the whole energy of our being. by
becoming conscious of them we in some fashion or other destroy their
concentration and diffuse their energy into other channels. we cease to
be possessed by one passion; contrary passions retain their vitality,
and an equilibrium tends to establish itself.

just what the psychological mechanism of all this is i do not pretend
to say. it is something to which psychologists are giving increasing
attention. but since hellenic times the phenomenon which i have been
describing has been well known. it was undoubtedly what the sophists
meant by the injunction: know thyself. it was in large measure to
achieve control through detachment that socrates elaborated his
dialectic, for the socratic dialectic is an instrument for making men
self-conscious, and therefore the masters of their motives. spinoza
grasped this principle with great clarity. “an emotion,” he says,
“which is a passion ceases to be a passion as soon as we [p220] form a
clear and distinct idea of it.” he goes on to say that “insofar as the
mind understands all things as necessary, it has more power over the
emotions, or is less passive to them.”

the more recent discoveries in the field of psychoanalysis are an
elaboration of this principle. they are based on the discovery of
freud and breuer at the close of the last century that a catharsis of
emotion is often obtained if the patient can be made to recall, and
thus to relive by describing it, the emotional situation which troubles
him. the release of the psychic poison is known technically as an
abreaction. where the new psychology supplements the insights of the
sophists, of socrates, and spinoza, is in the demonstration that there
are powerful passions affecting our lives of which it is impossible by
ordinary effort of memory “to form a clear and distinct idea.” they are
said to be unconscious, or more accurately, i suppose, they are out
of the reach of the normal consciousness. freud and his school have
invented an elaborate technic by which the analyst is able frequently
to help the patient thread his way back through a chain of associations
to the buried passion and fetch it into consciousness.

the special technic of psychoanalysis can be tested only by scientific
experience. the therapeutic claims made by psychoanalysts, and their
theories of the functional disorders, lie outside the realm of this
discussion. but the essential principle is not a technical matter.
anyone can confirm it out of his own experience. it has been discovered
and rediscovered by shrewd observers of human nature for at least
two thousand years. to become detached from one’s passions and to
understand them consciously [p221] is to render them disinterested. a
disinterested mind is harmonious with itself and with reality.

this is the principle by which a humanistic culture becomes bearable.
if the principle of a theocratic culture is dependence, obedience,
conformity in the presence of a superhuman power which administers
reality, the principle of humanism is detachment, understanding, and
disinterestedness in the presence of reality itself.


3. _virtue_

it can be shown, i think, that those qualities which civilized men,
regardless of their theologies and their allegiances, have agreed to
call virtues, have disinterestedness as their inner principle. i am not
talking now about the eccentric virtues which at some time or other
have been held in great esteem. i am not talking about the virtue of
not playing cards, or of not drinking wine, or of not eating beef, or
of not eating pork, or of not admitting that women have legs. these
little virtues are historical accidents which may or may not once
have had a rational origin. i am talking about the central virtues
which are esteemed by every civilized people. i am talking about such
virtues as courage, honor, faithfulness, veracity, justice, temperance,
magnanimity, and love.

they would not be called virtues and held in high esteem if there were
no difficulty about them. there are innumerable dispositions which are
essential to living that no one takes the trouble to praise. thus it is
not accounted a virtue if a man eats when he is hungry or goes to bed
when he is ill. he can be depended upon to take care of his immediate
wants. it is only those actions which [p222] he cannot be depended
upon to do, and yet are highly desirable, that men call virtuous. they
recognize that a premium has to be put upon certain qualities if men
are to make the effort which is required to transcend their ordinary
impulses. the premium consists in describing these desirable and rarer
qualities as virtues. for virtue is that kind of conduct which is
esteemed by god, or public opinion, or that less immediate part of a
man’s personality which he calls his conscience.

to transcend the ordinary impulses is, therefore, the common element in
all virtue. courage, for example, is the willingness to face situations
from which it would be more or less natural to run away. no one thinks
it is courageous to run risks unwittingly. the drunken driver of an
automobile, the boy playing with a stick of dynamite, the man drinking
water which he does not know is polluted, all take risks as great as
those of the most renowned heroes. but the fact that they do not know
the risks, and do not, therefore, have to conquer the fear they would
feel if they did know them, robs their conduct of all courage. the
test is not the uselessness or even the undesirability of their acts.
it is useless to go over niagara falls in a barrel. but it is brave,
assuming the performer to be in his right mind. it is a wicked thing
to assassinate a king. but if it is not done from ambush, it is brave,
however wicked and however useless.

because courage consists in transcending normal fears, the highest kind
of courage is cold courage; that is to say, courage in which the danger
has been fully realized and there is no emotional excitement to conceal
the danger. the world instantly recognized this in colonel lindbergh’s
[p223] flight to paris. he flew alone; he was not an impetuous fool,
but a man of the utmost sobriety of judgment. he had no companion to
keep his courage screwed up; he knew exactly what he was doing, yet
apparently he did not realize the rewards which were in store for him.
the world understood that here was somebody who was altogether braver
than the average sensual man. for colonel lindbergh did not merely
conquer the atlantic ocean; he conquered those things in himself which
the rest of us would have found unconquerable.

the cold courage of a man like noguchi who, though in failing health,
went into one of the unhealthiest parts of africa to study a deadly
disease, could come only from a nature which was overwhelmingly
interested in objects outside itself. noguchi must have known exactly
how dangerous it was for him to go to africa, and exactly how horrible
was the disease to which he exposed himself. to have gone anyway is
really to have cared for science in a way which very few care for
anything so remote and impersonal. but even courage like lindbergh’s
and noguchi’s is more comprehensible than the kind of courage which
anonymous men have displayed. i am thinking of the four soldiers at
the walter reed hospital who let themselves be used for the study
of typhoid fever. they did not even have lindbergh’s interest in
performing a great feat or noguchi’s interest in science to buoy them
up and carry them past the point where they might have faltered. their
courage was as near to absolute courage as it is possible to imagine,
and i who think this cannot even recall their names.

to understand the inwardness of courage would be, i [p224] think, to
have understood almost all the other important virtues. it is “not only
the chiefest virtue and most dignifies the haver,” but it embodies
the principle of all virtue, which is to transcend the immediacy of
desire and to live for ends which are transpersonal. virtuous action
is conduct which responds to situations that are more extensive,
more complicated, and take longer to reach their fulfillment, than
the situations to which we instinctively respond. an infant knows
neither vice nor virtue because it can respond only to what touches it
immediately. a man has virtue insofar as he can respond to a larger
situation.

he has honor if he holds himself to an ideal of conduct though it is
inconvenient, unprofitable, or dangerous to do so. he has veracity
if he says and believes what he thinks is true though it would be
easier to deceive others or himself. he is just if he acknowledges the
interests of all concerned in a transaction and not merely his own
apparent interest. he is temperate if, in the presence of temptation,
he can still prefer philip sober to philip drunk. he is magnanimous if,
as aristotle says, he cares “more for truth than for opinion,” speaks
and acts openly, will not live at the will of another, except it be a
friend, does not recollect injuries, does not care that he should be
praised or that others should be blamed, does not complain or ask for
help in unavoidable or trifling calamities. for such a man, as the word
‘magnanimous’ itself implies, is “conversant with great matters.”

a man who has these virtues has somehow overcome the inertia of his
impulses. their disposition is to respond to the immediate situation,
and not merely to the situation [p225] at the moment, but to the most
obvious fragment of it, and not only to the most obvious fragment,
but to that aspect which promises instant pleasure or pain. to have
virtue is to respond to larger situations and to longer stretches of
time and without much interest in their immediate result in convenience
and pleasure. it is to overcome the impulses of immaturity, to
detach one’s self from the objects that preoccupy it and from one’s
own preoccupations. there are many virtues in the catalogues of
the moralists, and they have many different names. but they have a
common principle, which is detachment from that which is apparently
pleasant or unpleasant, and they have a common quality, which is
disinterestedness, and they spring from a common source, which is
maturity of character.

few men, if any, possess virtue in all its varieties because few men
are wholly matured to the core of their being. we are for the most part
like fruit which is partly ripened: there is sourness and sweetness in
our natures. this may be due to the casualness of our upbringing; it
may be due to unknown congenital causes; it may be due to functional
and organic disease, to partial inferiorities of mind and body. but
it is due also to the fact that we can give our full attention only
to a few phases of our experience. with the equipment at our disposal
we are forced to specialize and to neglect very much. hence the
mature scientist with petty ambitions and ignoble timidities. hence
the realistic statesman who is a peevish husband. hence the man who
manages his affairs in masterly fashion and bungles every personal
relationship when he is away from his office. hence the loyal friend
who is a [p226] crooked politician, the kind father who is a merciless
employer, the champion of mankind who is an intolerable companion.
if any of these could carry over into all their relationships the
qualities which have made them distinguished in some, they would be
wholly adult and wholly good. it would not be necessary to imagine the
ideal character, for he would already exist.

it is out of these practical virtues that our conception of virtue has
been formed. we may be sure that no quality is likely to have become
esteemed as a virtue which did not somewhere and sometime produce
at least the appearance of happiness. the virtues are grounded in
experience; they are not idle suggestions inadvertently adopted because
somebody took it into his head one fine day to proclaim a new ideal.
there are, to be sure, certain residual and obsolete virtues which
no longer correspond to anything in our own experience and now seem
utterly arbitrary and capricious. but the cardinal virtues correspond
to an experience so long and so nearly universal among men of our
civilization, that when they are understood they are seen to contain a
deposited wisdom of the race.


4. _from clue to practice_

the wisdom deposited in our moral ideals is heavily obscured at the
present time. we continue to use the language of morality, having no
other which we can use. but the words are so hackneyed that their
meanings are concealed, and it is very hard, especially for young
people, to realize that virtue is really good and really relevant.
[p227] morality has become so stereotyped, so thin and verbal, so
encrusted with pious fraud, it has been so much monopolized by the
tender-minded and the sentimental, and made so odious by the outcries
of foolish men and sour old women, that our generation has almost
forgotten that virtue was not invented in sunday schools but derives
originally from a profound realization of the character of human life.

this sense of unreality is, i believe, due directly to the widespread
loss of genuine belief in the premises of popular religion. virtue is
a product of human experience: men acquired their knowledge of the
value of courage, honor, temperance, veracity, faithfulness, and love,
because these qualities were necessary to their survival and to the
attainment of happiness. but this human justification of virtue does
not carry conviction to the immature, and would not of itself break up
the inertia of their naive impulses. therefore, virtue which derives
from human insight has to be imposed on the immature by authority;
what was obtained on sinai was not the revelation of the moral law but
divine authority to teach it.

now the very thing which made moral wisdom convincing to our ancestors
makes it unconvincing to modern men. we do not live in a patriarchal
society. we do not live in a world which disposes us to a belief
in theocratic government. and therefore insofar as moral wisdom is
entangled with the premises of theocracy it is unreal to us. the
very thing which gave authority to moral insight for our forefathers
obscures moral insight for us. they lived in the kind of world which
disposed them to practice [p228] virtue if it came to them as a divine
commandment. a thoroughly modernized young man to-day distrusts moral
wisdom precisely because it is commanded.

it is often said that this distrust is merely an aspect of the normal
rebellion of youth. i do not believe it. this distrust is due to a
much more fundamental cause. it is due not to a rebellion against
authority but to an unbelief in it. this unbelief is the result of
that dissolution of the ancient order out of which modern civilization
is emerging, and unless we understand the radical character of this
unbelief we shall never understand the moral confusion of this age. we
shall fail to see that morals taught with authority are pervaded with
a sense of unreality because the sense of authority is no longer real.
men will not feel that wisdom is authentic if they are asked to believe
that it derives from something which does not seem authentic.

we may be quite certain, therefore, that we shall not succeed in making
the traditional morality convincingly authentic to modern men. the
whole tendency of the age is to make it seem less and less authentic.
the effort to impose it, nevertheless, merely deepens the confusion by
converting the discussion of morals from an examination of experience
into a dispute over its metaphysical sanctions. the consequence of this
dispute is to drive men, especially the most sensitive and courageous,
further away from insight into virtue and deeper and deeper into mere
negation and rebellion. what they are actually rebelling against is the
theocratic system in which they do not believe. but because that system
appears to them to claim a vested interest in morality they empty out
the baby with the [p229] bath, and lose all sense of the inwardness of
deposited wisdom.

for that reason the recovery of moral insight depends upon
disentangling virtue from its traditional sanctions and the
metaphysical framework which has hitherto supported it. it will be
said, i know, that this would rob virtue of its popular prestige. my
answer is that in those communities which are deeply under modern
influences the loss of belief in these very traditional sanctions and
this very metaphysical framework has robbed virtue of its relevance.
i should readily grant that for communities and for individuals which
are outside the orbit of modernity, it is neither necessary nor
desirable to disentangle morality from its ancient associations. it is
also impossible to do so, for when the ancestral order is genuinely
alive, there is no problem of unbelief. but where the problem exists,
when the ancient premises of morality have faded into mere verbal
acknowledgments, then these ancient premises obscure vision. they have
ceased to be the sanctions of virtue and have become obstructions to
moral insight. only by deliberately thinking their way past these
obstructions can modern men recover that innocence of the eye, that
fresh, authentic sense of the good in human relations on which a living
morality depends.

i have tried in these pages to do that for myself. i am under no
illusion as to the present value of the conceptions arrived at.
i regard them simply as a probable clue to the understanding of
modernity. if the clue is the correct one, the more we explore the
modern world the more coherence it will give to our understanding of
it. a true insight is fruitful; it multiplies insight, until at last
it not [p230] only illuminates a situation but provides a practical
guide to conduct. i believe the insight of high religion into the value
of disinterestedness will, if pursued resolutely, untangle the moral
confusion of the age and make plain, as it is not now plain, what we
are really driving at in our manifold activity, what we are compelled
to want, what, rather dimly now, we do want, and how to proceed about
achieving it. to say that is to say that i believe in the hypothesis.
i do believe in it. i believe that this valuation of human life, which
was once the possession of an élite, now conforms to the premises of a
whole civilization.

the proof of that must lie in a detailed and searching examination
of the facts all about us. if the ideal of human character which
is prophesied in high religion is really suitable and necessary in
modern civilization, then an examination ought to show that events
themselves are pregnant with it. if they are not, then all this is
moonshine and cobwebs and castles in the air. unless circumstance and
necessity are behind it, the insight of high religion is still, as it
has always been hitherto, a noble eccentricity of the soul. for men
will not take it seriously, they will not devote themselves to the
discovery and invention of ways of cultivating maturity, detachment,
and disinterestedness unless events conspire to drive them to it.

the realization of this ideal is plainly a process of education in
the most inclusive sense of that term. but it will not do much good
to tell mothers that they should lead their children away from their
childishness; an actual mother, even if she understood so abstruse a
bit of advice, and did not reject it out of hand as a reflection upon
the [p231] glory of childhood, would insist upon being told very
concretely what this good advice means and how with a bawling infant in
the cradle you go about cultivating his capacity to be disinterested.
it is not much better to offer the advice to school teachers; they will
wish to know what they must not do that they now do, and what they must
do that they leave undone. but the answers to these questions are no
more to be had from the original concept than are rules for breeding
fine cattle to be had from the theory of evolution and mendel’s law. by
the use of the concept, psychologists and educators may, if the concept
is correct and if they are properly encouraged, thread their way by
dialectic and by experiment to practical knowledge which is actually
usable as a method of education and as a personal discipline.

if they are to do that they will have to see quite clearly just how
and in what sense the ideal of disinterestedness is inherent and
inevitable in the modern world. the remaining chapters of this book are
an attempt to do that by demonstrating that in three great phases of
human interest, in business, in government, and in sexual relations,
the ideal is now implicit and necessary.




chapter xii [p232]

the business of the great society


1. _the invention of invention_

one of the characteristics of the age we live in is that we are forever
trying to explain it. we feel that if we understood it better we should
know better how to live in it, and should cease to be aliens who do not
know the landmarks of a strange country. there is, however, a school
of philosophic historians who argue that this sense of novelty in the
modern world is an illusion, and that as a matter of fact mankind has
passed before through the same phase of the same inexorable cycle. the
boldest of them, like oswald spengler, cite chapter and verse to show
that there have been several of these great cycles of development from
incubation through maturity to decay, and that our western civilization
which began about 900 a.d. is now in the phase which corresponds with
the century after pericles in the classical world.

that the analogy is striking no reader of spengler will deny who can
endure spengler’s procrustean determination to make the evidence fit
the theory. we can see the growth of towns at the expense of the
farms, the rise of capitalism, the growth of international trade and
finance, a development of nationalism, of democracy, attempts at the
abolition of war through international organization, and with it all
a dissolution of the popular religion, of [p233] the traditional
morality, and vast and searching inquiry into the meaning of life.
there is little doubt that the speculation of the greek philosophers
seems extraordinarily fresh to us, because they were confronted with a
situation in many respects remarkably like our own.

but however nicely such analogies are worked out they are superficial
and misleading. there is something radically new in the modern world,
something for which there is no parallel in any other civilization.
this new thing is usually described as power-driven machinery. thus
mr. charles a. beard says that “what is called western or modern
civilization by way of contrast with the civilization of the orient or
mediæval times is at bottom a civilization that rests upon machinery
and science as distinguished from one founded on agriculture or
handicraft commerce. it is in reality a technological civilization ...
and ... it threatens to overcome and transform the whole globe.” by way
of illustrating how deeply machinery affects human life, mr. beard says
that because they are untouched by this machine civilization “there
are more fundamental resemblances between the culture of a peasant in
a remote village in spain and that of a peasant in a remote village
in japan than between the culture of a christian priest of the upper
pyrenees and that of a baptist clergyman in a thriving manufacturing
town in illinois.”

mr. h. g. wells uses much the same argument to show that in spite of
the apparent similarities there is an essential difference between our
civilization and the later phases of the classical. “the essential
difference,” he says, “between the amassing of riches, the extinction
of small farmers and small business men, and the phase of [p234] big
finance in the latter centuries of the roman republic on the one hand,
and the very similar concentration of capital in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries on the other, lies in the profound difference in
the character of labor that the mechanical revolution was bringing
about. the power of the old world was human power; everything depended
ultimately upon the driving power of human muscle, the muscle of
ignorant and subjugated men. a little animal muscle, supplied by draft
oxen, horse traction, and the like contributed. where a weight had to
be lifted, men lifted it; where a rock had to be quarried, men chipped
it out; where a field had to be ploughed, men and oxen ploughed it;
the roman equivalent of the steamship was the galley with its banks of
sweating rowers.... the roman civilization was built upon cheap and
degraded human beings; modern civilization is being rebuilt upon cheap
mechanical power.”

these differences are genuine enough, and yet it is doubtful whether
mr. wells has described the really “new thing in human experience.”
after all a great deal of cheap man power is still used in conjunction
with cheap mechanical power; it is somewhat of an idealization to
talk as if the machine had supplanted the drudge. what mr. wells has
in mind, of course, is that in the roman world a vast proportion of
mankind were doomed to “purely mechanical drudgery” whereas in the
modern world there is tangible hope that they will be released from it.
they are not yet released from it, however, and their hope of release
rests upon the really new element in human experience.

the various mechanical inventions from james watt’s [p235] steam
engine to the electric dishwasher and vacuum cleaner are not this new
element. all these inventions, singly or collectively, though they have
revolutionized the manner of human life, are not the ultimate reason
why men put such hope in machines. their hope is not based on the
machines we possess. they are obviously a mixed blessing. their hope is
based on the machines that are yet to be made, and they have reason to
hope because a really new thing has come into the world. that thing is
the invention of invention.

men have not merely invented the modern machines. there have been
machines invented since the earliest days, incalculably important, like
the wheel, like sailing ships, like the windmill and the watermill.
but in modern times men have invented a method of inventing, they have
discovered a method of discovery. mechanical progress has ceased to
be casual and accidental and has become systematic and cumulative. we
know, as no other people ever knew before, that we shall make more
and more perfect machines. when mr. beard says that “the machine
civilization differs from all others in that it is highly dynamic,
containing within itself the seeds of constant reconstruction,” he is,
i take it, referring to this supreme discovery which is the art of
discovery itself.


2. _the creative principle in modernity_

although the disposition to scientific thought may be said to have
originated in remote antiquity, it was not until the sixteenth century
of our era that it ceased to appear spasmodically and as if by chance.
the greeks had their schools on the shores of the ægean, in sicily,
[p236] and in alexandria, and in them some of the conclusions and much
of the spirit of scientific inquiry was imaginatively anticipated.
but the conscious organized effort to relate “general principles to
irreducible and stubborn facts,” as mr. whitehead puts it, began about
three hundred years ago. the first society chiefly devoted to science
seems to have been founded by della porta at naples in 1560, but it
was closed by the ecclesiastical authorities. forty years later the
_accademia dei lincei_ was founded at rome with galileo among its early
members. the royal society of london was chartered in 1662. the french
academy of sciences began its meetings in 1666, the berlin academy in
1700, the american philosophical association was proposed by benjamin
franklin in 1743 and organized in 1769.

the active pursuit of science is a matter, then, of only a few hundred
years. the practical consequences in the form of useful inventions are
still more recent. newcomen’s air-and-steam engine dates from 1705,
but it was not until 1764 that james watt produced a practicable steam
engine. it was not until the beginning of the nineteenth century that
invention really got under way and began to transform the structure
of civilization. it was not until about 1850 that the importance of
invention had impressed itself upon the english people, yet they were
the first to experience the effects of the mechanical revolution. they
had seen the first railway, the first steamboat, the illumination
of towns by gas, and the application of power-driven machinery to
manufacture. professor bury fixes the exhibition of london in 1851 as
the event which marks the public recognition of the role of science
[p237] in modern civilization. the prince consort who originated the
exhibition said in his opening speech that it was designed “to give
us a true test and a living picture of the point of development at
which the whole of mankind has arrived in this great task, and a new
starting-point from which the nations will be able to direct their
further exertions.”

but this public recognition was at first rather sentimental and
gaping. the full realization of the place of science in modern life
came slowly, and only in our generation can it be said that political
rulers, captains of industry, and leaders of thought have actually
begun to appreciate how central is science in our civilization, and to
act upon that realization. in our time governments have begun to take
science seriously and to promote research and invention not only in
the art of war, but in the interest of trade, agriculture, and public
hygiene. great corporations have established laboratories of their
own, not merely for the perfecting of their own processes, but for
the promotion of pure research. money has become available in great
quantities for scientific work in the universities, and the educational
curriculum down to the lowest grades has begun to be reorganized not
only in order to train a minority of the population for research and
invention, but to train the great majority to understand and use the
machines and the processes which are available.

the motives and the habits of mind which are thus brought into play at
the very heart of modern civilization are mature and disinterested.
that may not be the primary intention, but it is the inevitable
result. no doubt [p238] governments encourage research in order to
have powerful weapons with which to overawe their neighbors; no doubt
industries encourage research because it pays; no doubt scientists
and inventors are in some measure moved by the desire for wealth and
fame; no doubt the general public approves of science because of the
pleasures and conveniences it provides; no doubt there is an intuitive
sense in modern communities that the prospects of survival both for
nations and for individuals are somehow related to their command of
scientific knowledge. but nevertheless, whatever the motives which
cause men to endow laboratories, to work patiently in laboratories or
to buy the products, the fact remains that inside the laboratory, at
the heart of this whole business, the habit of disinterested realism in
dealing with the data is the indispensable habit of mind. unless this
habit of mind exists in the actual research, all the endowments and
honorary degrees and prize awards will not produce the results desired.
this is an original and tremendous fact in human experience: that a
whole civilization should be dependent upon technology, that this
technology should be dependent upon pure science, and that this pure
science should be dependent upon a race of men who consciously refuse,
as mr. bertrand russell has said, to regard their “own desires, tastes,
and interests as affording a key to the understanding of the world.”

when i say that the refusal is conscious i do not mean merely that
scientists tell themselves that they must ignore their prejudices.
they have developed an elaborate method for detecting and discounting
their prejudices. it consists of instruments of precision, an accurate
vocabulary, [p239] controlled experiment, and the submission not only
of their results but of their processes to the judgment of their peers.
this method provides a body in which the spirit of disinterestedness
can live, and it might be said that modern science, not in its crude
consequences but in its inward principle, not, that is to say, as
manifested in automobiles, electric refrigerators, and rayon silk, but
in the behavior of the men who invent and perfect these things, is
the actual realization in a practicable mode of conduct which can be
learned and practiced, of the insight of high religion. the scientific
discipline is one way in which this insight, hitherto lyrical and
personal and apart, is brought down to earth and into direct and
decisive contact with the concerns of mankind.

it is no exaggeration to say that pure science is high religion
incarnate. no doubt the science we have is not the whole incarnation,
but as far as it goes it translates into a usable procedure what in the
teaching of the sages has been an esoteric insight. scientific method
can be learned. the learning of it matures the human character. its
value can be demonstrated in concrete results. its importance in human
life is indisputable. but the insight of high religion as such could be
appreciated only by those who were already mature; it corresponded to
nothing in the experience and the necessities of the ordinary man. it
could be talked about but not taught; it could inspire only the few who
were somehow already inspired. with the discovery of scientific method
the insight has ceased to be an intangible and somewhat formless idea
and has become an organized effort which moves mankind more profoundly
than anything else in human affairs. therefore, [p240] what was once
a personal attitude on the part of a few who were somewhat withdrawn
and disregarded has become the central principle in the careers of
innumerable, immensely influential, men.

because the scientific discipline is, in fact, the creative element in
that which is distinctively modern, circumstances conspire to enhance
its prestige and to extend its acceptance. it is the ultimate source
of profit and of power, and therefore it is assured of protection and
encouragement by those who rule the modern state. they cannot afford
not to cultivate the scientific spirit: the nation which does not
cultivate it cannot hold its place among the nations, the corporation
which ignores it will be destroyed by its competitors. the training of
an ever increasing number of pure scientists, of inventors, and of men
who can operate and repair machinery is, therefore, a sheer practical
necessity. the scientific discipline has become, as mr. graham wallas
would say, an essential part of our social heritage. for the machine
technology requires a population which in some measure partakes of the
spirit which created it.

naturally enough, however, the influence of the scientific spirit
becomes more and more diluted the further one goes from the work of the
men who actually conceive, discover, invent, and perfect the modern
machines. from faraday, maxwell, and hertz who did the chief work
which made possible the wireless it is a long way to the broker who
sells radio stock or the householder with his six-tube set. i have not
been supposing that these latter partake in any way of the original
spirit which made the radio possible. but it is a fact of enormous
consequences, [p241] cumulative in its effect upon the education of
succeeding generations, that the radio, and all the other contrivances
around which modern civilization is constructed, should be possible
only by the increasing use of a scientific discipline.


3. _naive capitalism_

the application of science to the daily affairs of men was acclaimed
at first with more enthusiasm than understanding. “that early people,”
said buffon, speaking of the babylonians, “was very happy, because
it was very scientific.” entranced with the success of the newtonian
physics and by the dazzling effect of inventions, the intellectuals
of the eighteenth century persuaded themselves that science was a
messianic force which would liberate mankind from pain, drudgery, and
error. it was believed that science would somewhat mysteriously endow
mankind with invincible power over the forces of nature, and that men,
if they were released from the bondage of religious custom and belief,
could employ the power of science to their own consummate happiness.
the mechanical revolution, in short, was inaugurated on the theory
that the natural man must be liberated from moral conventions and that
nature must be subjugated by mechanical instruments.

there are intelligible historical reasons why our great grandfathers
adopted this view. they found themselves in a world regulated by the
customs and beliefs of a landed society. they could not operate their
factories successfully in such a society, and they rebelled fiercely
against the customs which restricted them. that rebellion [p242]
was rationalized in the philosophy of _laissez-faire_ which meant in
essence that machine industry must not be interfered with by landlords
and peasants who had feudal rights, nor by governments which protected
those rights. on the positive side this rebellion expressed itself in
declarations of the rights of man. these declarations were a denial of
the vested rights of men under the old landed order and an assertion of
the rights of men, particularly the new middle-class men, who proposed
to make the most of the new industrial and mechanical order. by the
rights of men they meant primarily freedom of contract, freedom of
trade, freedom of occupation—those freedoms, that is to say, which
made it possible for the new employer to buy and sell, to hire and fire
without being accountable to anyone.

the prophet of this new dispensation was adam smith. in the _wealth of
nations_ he wrote that

  all systems either of preference or of restraint ... being thus
  completely taken away, the obvious and simple system of natural
  liberty establishes itself of its own accord. every man, as long as
  he does not violate the laws of justice, is left perfectly free to
  pursue his own interest his own way, and to bring both his industry
  and capital into competition with those of any other man, or order
  of men.

the employing class in the early days of capitalism honestly believed,
and indeed its less enlightened members still believe to this very
day, that somehow the general welfare will be served by trusting
naively to the acquisitive instincts of the employing capitalist. thus
at the outset the machine technology was applied under the direction
of men who scorned as sentimental, when they [p243] did not regard
as subversive, that disinterestedness which alone makes possible the
machine technology itself. they did not understand science. they merely
exploited certain of the inventions which scientists produced. what
they believed, insofar as they had any philosophy, was that there
exists a preestablished harmony in the universe—an “obvious and
simple system of natural liberty,” in adam smith’s language, “which
establishes itself of its own accord”—by which if each man naively
pursued his primitive impulse to have and to hold in competition with
other men, peace, prosperity, and happiness would ensue.

they did not ensue. and the social history of the last seventy-five
years has in large measure been concerned with the birth pains of an
industrial philosophy that will really suit the machine technology and
the nature of man. for the notion that an intricate and delicately
poised industrial mechanism could be operated by uneducated men
snatching competitively at profits was soon exposed as a simple-minded
delusion.

it was discovered that if each banker was permitted to do what seemed
to him immediately most profitable, the result was a succession of
disastrous inflations and deflations of credit; that if natural
resources in oil, coal, lumber, and the like were subjected to the
competitive principle, the result was a shocking waste of irreplaceable
wealth; that if the hiring and firing of labor were carried on under
absolute freedom of contract, a whole chain of social evils in the form
of child labor, unsuitable labor for women, sweating, unemployment,
and the importation of cheap and unassimilable labor resulted; that if
business men were left to their own devices the consumer of necessary
[p244] goods was helpless when he was confronted with industries
in which there was an element of monopoly. there is no need here to
recount the well-known story of how in every modern community the
theory of free competition has in the course of the last generation
been modified by legislation, by organized labor, by organized business
itself. so little has _laissez-faire_ worked under actual experience
that all the powers of the government have actually had to be invoked
to preserve a certain amount of compulsory “free competition.” for the
industrial machine, as soon as it passes out of the early phase of
rough exploitation in virgin territory, becomes unmanageable by naively
competitive and acquisitive men.


4. _the credo of old-style business_

it was frequently pointed out by moralists like ruskin and william
morris, and by churchmen as well, that this “obvious and simple system
of natural liberty” by which “every man was left perfectly free to
pursue his own interest his own way,” was not only contrary to the
dogmas of the popular religion but irreconcilable with moral wisdom.
the credo of the unregenerate business man was utterly atheistical in
its premises, for it displaced the notion that there is any higher
will than his own to which the employer is accountable. it was more
than atheistical, however; it was, in aristotle’s sense of the word,
barbarous in that it implied “the living as one likes” with virtually
complete acquiescence in the supremacy of the acquisitive instinct.

there is no reason to suppose that such theoretical comments on the
credo of naive capitalism did more than [p245] rub off a little
of its unction. capitalism may be, as mr. maynard keynes has said,
“absolutely irreligious ... often, though not always, a mere congeries
of possessors and pursuers.” were the credo workable in practice, some
way would have been found of anointing it with attractive phrases. the
real reason for the gradual abandonment of the credo, proclaimed by
adam smith and repeated so steadily since his day, is that the credo
of naive capitalism is deeply at variance with the real character
of modern industry. it rests upon false premises, is therefore
contradicted by experience, and has proved to be unworkable.

the system of natural liberty assumes that if each man pursues his own
interest his own way, each man will promote his interest. there is an
unanalyzed fallacy in this theory which makes it utterly meaningless.
it is assumed that each man knows his own interest and can therefore
pursue it. but that is precisely what no man is certain to know, and
what few men can possibly know if they consult only their own impulses.
there is nothing in the natural equipment of man which enables him to
know intuitively whether it will be profitable to increase his output
or reduce it, to enter a new line of business, to buy or to sell, or to
make any of the other thousand and one decisions on which the conduct
of business depends. since he is not born with this wisdom, since
he does not automatically absorb it from the air, to pursue his own
interest his own way is a fairly certain way to disaster.

the fallacy of the theory of natural liberty is undetected in a
bonanza period of industrial development. where the business man has
unexhausted natural resources to [p246] draw upon, where there is a
surplus of customers competing for his goods, he can with naive and
furious energy pursue his own interests his own way and reap enormous
profits. there is no real resistance from the outside; there are no
stubborn and irreducible facts to which he must adjust himself. he
can proceed with an infantile philosophy to achieve success. but this
bonanza period when the omnipotence of the capitalist is unthwarted,
and his omniscience therefore assumed, soon comes to an end. in
advanced communities the mere multiplication of industries produces
such a complicated environment that the business man is compelled to
substitute considered policies for his intuitions, objective surveys
for his guesses, and conferences world without end for his natural
liberties.

what has upset the idea of the old-style business man that he knows
what’s what is that the relevant facts are no longer visible. the owner
of a primitive factory might have known all his working men and all
his customers; the keeper of a little neighborhood shop may still, to
a certain extent, know personally his whole business. but for most
men to-day the facts which matter vitally to them are out of sight,
beyond their personal control, intricate, subject to more or less
unpredictable changes, and even with highly technical reporting and
analysis almost unintelligible to the average man.

it is, of course, the machine process itself which has created these
complications. men are forced to buy and sell in markets that for many
commodities are world-wide: they do not buy and sell in one market
but in many markets, in markets for raw materials, in markets for
semi-finished goods, in wholesale and retail markets, in labor [p247]
markets, in the money market. they employ and are employed in corporate
organizations which are owned here, there, and everywhere. they compete
not only with their obvious competitors in the same line of business,
but with competitors in wholly different lines of business, automobiles
with railroads, railroads with ships, cotton goods with silk and silk
with artificial silk, pianos with furs and cigarettes with chewing gum.
the modern environment is invisible, complex, without settled plan,
subtly and swiftly changing, offering innumerable choices, demanding
great knowledge and imaginative effort to comprehend it.

it is not a social order at all as the greek city state or the feudal
society was a social order. it is rather a field for careers, an arena
of talents, an ordeal by trial and error, and a risky speculation. no
man has an established position in the modern world. there is no system
of rights and duties to which he is clearly subject. he moves among
these complexities which are shrouded in obscurity, making the best he
can out of what little it is possible for him to know.


5. _old-style reform and revolution_

naive capitalism—that is to say, the theory of each for himself
according to such light as he might happen to possess—produced such
monstrous evils the world over that an anti-capitalist reaction was
the inevitable result. what had happened was that the most intricate
and consequential technology which man has ever employed on this
planet was given over to the direction of a class of enterprising,
acquisitive, uneducated, and undisciplined [p248] men. no doubt it
could not have been otherwise. the only discipline that was known was
the discipline of custom in a society of farmers, hand-workers, and
traders. the only education available was one based on the premises
of the past. the revolution in human affairs produced by the machine
began slowly, and no one could have anticipated its course. it would
be absurd, therefore, to complain in retrospect over the fact that
no one was prepared for the industrial changes which took place.
the only absurdity, and it is still a prevalent one, is to go on
supposing that the political philosophy and the “economic laws” which
were extemporized to justify the behavior of the first bewildered
capitalists have any real bearing upon modern industry.

but it is almost equally absurd to take too seriously the “reforms”
and “solutions” which were devised by kindhearted men to alleviate
the pains suffered by those who were hurt by the results of this
early capitalist control of the machine. these proposals, when they
are examined, turn out almost invariably to have been proposals for
coercing or for abolishing the then masters of industry. i do not
mean to deny the utility of the long series of legislative enactments
which began about the middle of the nineteenth century and are still
being elaborated. the factory acts, the regulatory laws, the measures
designed to protect the consumers against fraud were, looked at singly,
good, bad, or indifferent. as a whole they were a necessary attempt
to police those who had been left free to pursue their own interest
their own way. but when it has been said that they were necessary,
and that they are still necessary, it is important to realize just
what they [p249] imply. they imply that the masters of industry are
unregenerate and will remain unregenerate. the whole effort to police
capitalism assumes that the capitalist can be civilized only by means
of the police. the trouble with this theory is that there is no way
to make sure that the policemen will themselves be civilized. it
presupposes that somehow politicians and office-holders will be wise
enough and disinterested enough to make business men do what they would
not otherwise do. the fundamental problem, which is to find a way of
directing industry wisely, is not solved. it is merely deposited on the
doorsteps of the politician.

the revolutionary programs sponsored by the socialists in the half
century before the great war were based on the notion that it is
impossible to police the capitalist-employers and that, therefore, they
should be abolished. in their place functionaries were to be installed.
the theory was that these functionaries, being hired by the state and
being deprived of all incentive for personal profit, would administer
the industrial machine disinterestedly. the trouble with this theory is
in its assumption that the removal of one kind of temptation, namely,
the possibility of direct personal pecuniary profit—will make the
functionaries mature and disinterested men.

this is nothing but a new variant of the ascetic principle that it is
possible to shut off an undesirable impulse by thwarting it. human
nature does not work that way. the mere frustration of an impulse like
acquisitiveness produces either some new expression of that impulse or
disorders due to its frustration. it produces, that is to say, either
corruption or the lethargy, the pedantry, and the [p250] officiousness
which are the diseases of bureaucracy the world over. the socialists
are right, as the early christians were right, in their profound
distrust of the acquisitive instinct as the dominant motive in society.
but they are wrong in supposing that by transferring the command of
industry from business men to socialist officials they can in any
fundamental sense alter the acquisitive instinct. that can be done only
by refining the human character through a better understanding of the
environment. i do not mean to say that a revolution like the russian
does not sweep away a vast amount of accumulated rubbish. i am talking
not about the salutary destruction which may accompany a revolution,
but of the problem which confronts the successful revolutionists when
they have to carry on the necessary affairs of men.

when that time comes they are bound to find that the administration
of industry under socialism no less than under capitalism depends
upon the character of the administrators. corrupt, stupid, grasping
functionaries will make at least as big a muddle of socialism as
stupid, selfish, and acquisitive employers can make of capitalism.
there is no escape from this elementary truth, and all social policies
which attempt to ignore it must come to grief. they are essentially
utopian. the early doctrine of _laissez-faire_ was utopian because it
assumed that unregenerate men were destined somehow to muddle their
way to a harmonious result. the early socialism was utopian because it
assumed that these same unregenerate men, once the laws of property had
been altered, would somehow muddle their way to a harmonious result.
both ignored the chief lesson of human experience, which is [p251] the
insight of high religion, that unregenerate men can only muddle into
muddle.

a dim recognition of this truth has helped to inspire the procedure of
the two most recent manifestations of the revolutionary spirit. i refer
to bolshevism and to fascism. it is proper, i believe, to talk of them
as one phenomenon for their fundamental similarities, as most everyone
but the bolshevists and the fascists themselves has noted, are much
greater than their superficial differences. they were attempts to cure
the evils resulting from the breakdown of a somewhat primitive form
of capitalism. in neither russia nor italy had modern industrialism
passed beyond its adolescent phase. in both countries the prevailing
social order for the great mass of people was still pre-machine and
pre-industrial. in both countries the acids of modernity had not yet
eaten deeply into the religious disposition of the people. in both
countries the natural pattern of all government was still the primitive
pattern of the hierarchy with an absolute sovereign at the top. the
bolshevik dictatorship and the fascist dictatorship, underneath all
their modernist labels and theories, are feudal military organizations
attempting to subdue and administer the machine technology.

the theorists of the two dictatorships are, however, men educated under
modern influences, and the result is that their theories are an attempt
to explain the primitive behavior of the two dictatorships in terms
which are consistent with modern ideas. the formula reached in both
instances is the same one. the dictatorships are said to be temporary.
their purpose, we are told, is to put the [p252] new social order
into effect, and to keep it going long enough by dictation from on top
to give time for a new generation to grow up which will be purged of
those vices which would make the new order unworkable. the bolshevists
and fascists regard themselves as ever so much more realistic than
the old democratic socialists and the _laissez-faire_ liberals whom
they have executed, exiled, or dosed with castor oil. in an important
sense they are more realistic. they have recognized that a substitute
for primitive capitalism cannot be inaugurated or administered by a
generation which has been schooled in the ways of primitive capitalism.
and therefore the oligarchy of dictators, as a conscious, enlightened,
superior, and heavily armed minority, propose to administer the
industrial machine as trustees until there is a generation ready to
accept the responsibilities.

it would be idle to predict that they will not succeed. but it is
reasonable, i believe, to predict that if they succeed it will
be because they are administering relatively simple industrial
arrangements. it is precisely because the economic system of russia is
still fundamentally pre-capitalist and pre-mechanical that the feudal
organization of the bolshevists is most likely to survive. because
the economic system of italy is more modern than russia’s, the future
of the fascist dictatorship is much less assured. for insofar as the
machine technology is advanced, it becomes complex, delicate, and
difficult to manage by commands from the top.


6. _the diffusion of the acquisitive instinct_

while both the bolshevists and the fascists look upon [p253]
themselves as pathfinders of progress, it is fairly clear, i think,
that they are, in the literal meaning of the term, reactionary. they
have won their victories among the people to whom modern large scale
industrial organization is still an unnatural and alien thing. it is no
accident that fascism or bolshevism took root in italy and spain, but
not in germany and england, in hungary but not in austria, in poland
but not in czechoslovakia, in russia but not in scandinavia, in china
but not in japan, in central america but not in canada or the united
states. dictatorship, based on a military hierarchy, administering
the affairs of the community on behalf of the “nation” or of the
“proletariat,” is nothing but a return to the natural organization of
society in the pre-machine age. some countries, like russia, mexico,
and china, for example, are still living in the pre-machine age.
others, like italy, had become only partially industrialized when they
were subjected to such strains by the war that they reverted to the
feudal pattern of behavior. unable to master the industrial process by
methods which are appropriate to it, the fascists and the bolshevists
are attempting to master it by methods which antedate it. that is why
military dictatorship in a country like mexico may be looked upon as
the normal type of social control, whereas in italy it is regressive
and neurotic. feudal habits are appropriate to a feudal society; in
a semi-industrialized nation they are a social disease. it is the
disease of frightened and despairing men who, having failed to adjust
themselves to the reality of the industrial process, try, by main
force and awkwardness, to adjust the machine process to a pre-machine
mentality. [p254]

the more primitive the machine process is—that is, the more nearly it
resembles the petty handicrafts of earlier days—the better are the
chances for survival of a bolshevist or fascist dictatorship. where
the machine technology is really established and advanced it is simply
unmanageable by militarized functionaries. for when the process has
become infinitely complicated, the subdivision of function is carried
so far, the internal adjustments are so numerous and so varied that
no collection of oligarchs in a capital city, however much they may
look like supermen, can possibly direct the industrial system. in its
advanced stages, as it now exists in england, germany, or the united
states, nobody comprehends the system as a whole. one has only to
glance over the financial pages of an american newspaper, to look at
the list of corporations doing business, to try and imagine the myriad
daily decisions at a thousand points which their business involves,
in order to realize the bewildering complexity of modern industrial
society. to suppose that all that can be administered, or even
directed, from any central point by any human brain, by any cabinet of
officeholders or cabal of revolutionists, is simply to have failed to
take it in. here is the essential reason why bolshevism and fascism
are, as we say, un-american. they are no less un-belgian, un-german,
un-english. for they are unindustrial.

the same reasons which make dictatorship unworkable are rapidly
rendering obsolete the attempts to reform industry by policing it.
every year as the machine technology becomes more elaborated, the
legislative control for which the pre-war progressives fought becomes
less [p255] effective. it becomes more and more difficult for
legislatures to make laws to protect the workers which really fit the
rapidly changing conditions of work. hence the tendency to put the real
law-making power in the hands of administrative officials and judges
who can adjust the general purpose of the law to the unclassifiable
facts of industry. the whole attempt to regulate public utilities in
the interest of the consumer is chaotic, for these organizations, by
their intricacies, their scale, and their constant revolutions in
technology, tend to escape the jurisdiction of officials exercising
a local jurisdiction. the current outcry against the multiplication
of laws and the meddling of legislatures is in part, but not wholly,
the outcry of old-fashioned business men demanding their old natural
liberty to pursue their own interest their own way. the outcry is
due no less to a recognition that the industrial process is becoming
too subtly organized to be policed successfully by the wholesale,
uninformed enactments of legislatures.

yet the very thing which makes an advanced industrial organization
too complex to be directed by a dictatorship, or to be policed by
democratic politicians, is forcing the leaders of industry to evolve
forms of self-control. when i say that they are being forced to do this
i am not referring to those ostentatiously benevolent things which are
done now and then as sops to cerberus. there is a certain amount of
reform undertaken voluntarily by men who profess to fear ‘bolshevism,’
and if not bolshevism, then congress. that is relatively unimportant.
so also is the discovery that it pays to cultivate the good will of
the public. what i am referring to is the fact that the [p256] sheer
complexity of the industrial system would make it unmanageable to
business men, no less than to politicians or dictators, if business men
were not learning to organize its control.

it is the necessity of stabilizing their own business, of directing
technical processes which are beyond the understanding of stockholders,
of adjusting the supply and demand of the multitudinous elements
they deal in, which is the compelling force behind that divorce
between management and ownership, that growing use of experts and of
statistical measurements, and that development of trade associations,
of conferences, committees, and councils, with which modern industry
is honeycombed. the captain of industry in the romantic sense tends to
disappear in highly evolved industrial organizations. his thundering
commands are replaced by the decisions of executives who consult with
representatives of the interests involved and check their opinions
by the findings of experts. the greater the corporation the more
the shareholders and the directors lose the actual direction of the
institution. they cannot direct the corporation because they do
not really know what it is and what it is doing. that knowledge is
subdivided among the executives and bureau chiefs and consultants, all
of them on salary; each of them is so relatively small a factor in the
whole that his personal success is in very large degree bound up with
the success of the institution. a certain amount of jealousy, intrigue,
and destructive pushing, of office politics, in short, naturally
prevails, men being what they are. but as compared with the old-style
business man, the ordinary executive in a great corporation is
something quite strange. he is [p257] so little the monarch of all he
surveys, his experience is so continually with stubborn and irreducible
facts, he is so much compelled to adjust his own preferences to the
preferences of others, that he becomes a relatively disinterested
person. the more clearly he realizes the nature of his position in
industry, the more he tends to submit his desires to the discipline of
objective information. and the more he does this the less dominated
he is by the acquisitiveness of immaturity. he may on the side gamble
acquisitively in the stock market or at the race track, but in relation
to his business his acquisitive instinct tends to become diffused and
to be absorbed in the job itself.


7. _ideals_

it is my impression that when machine industry reaches a certain scale
of complexity it exerts such pressure upon the men who run it that they
cannot help socializing it. they are subject to a kind of economic
selection under which only those men survive who are capable of taking
a somewhat disinterested view of their work. a mature industry, because
it is too subtly organized to be run by naively passionate men, puts a
premium upon men whose characters are sufficiently matured to make them
respect reality and to discount their own prejudices.

when the machine technology is really advanced, that is to say when it
has drawn great masses of men within the orbit of its influence, when
a corporation has become really great, the old distinction between
public and private interest becomes very dim. i think it is destined
largely to disappear. it is difficult even to-day to say [p258]
whether the great railways, the general electric company, the united
states steel corporation, the bigger insurance companies and banks are
public or private institutions. when institutions reach a point where
the legal owners are virtually disfranchised, when the direction is in
the hands of salaried executives, technicians, and experts who hold
themselves more or less accountable in standards of conduct to their
fellow professionals, when the ultimate control is looked upon by the
directors not as “business” but as a trust, it is not fanciful to say,
as mr. keynes has said, that “the battle of socialism against unlimited
private profit is being won in detail hour by hour.”

insofar as industry itself evolves its own control, it will regain its
liberty from external interference. to say that is to say simply that
the “natural liberty” of the early business man was unworkable because
the early business man was unregenerate: he was immature, and he was
therefore acquisitive. the only kind of liberty which is workable in
the real world is the liberty of the disinterested man, of the man who
has transformed his passions by an understanding of necessity. he can,
as confucius said, follow what his heart desires without transgressing
what is right. for he has learned to desire what is right.

the more perfectly we understand the implications of the machine
technology upon which our civilization is based, the easier it will be
for us to live with it. we shall discern the ideals of our industry in
the necessities of industry itself. they are the direction in which it
must evolve if it is to fulfill itself. that is what ideals are. they
are not hallucinations. they are not a collection [p259] of pretty and
casual preferences. ideals are an imaginative understanding of that
which is desirable in that which is possible. as we discern the ideals
of the machine technology we can consciously pursue them, knowing that
we are not vainly trying to impose our casual prejudices, but that we
are in harmony with the age we live in.




chapter xiii [p260]

government in the great society


1. _loyalty_

the difficulty of discovering an industrial philosophy which fits
machine industry on a large scale has proved less trying than the
discovery of a political philosophy which fits the modern state. i do
not know why this should be so unless it be that, as compared with
politicians, business men have had a closer opportunity to observe
and more pressing reasons for trying to understand the transformation
wrought by machinery and scientific invention. certainly even the best
political thinking is notably inferior in realism and in pertinence
to the economic thinking which now plays so important a part in the
direction of industry. to a very considerable degree the writer on
politics to-day is about where the economist was when all economic
theory began and for all practical purposes seemed to end with robinson
crusoe and his man friday. nobody takes political science very
seriously, for nobody is convinced that it is a science or that it has
any important bearing on politics.

in very considerable measure political theory in the modern world
is sterilized by its own ideas. there have been passed down from
generation to generation a collection of concepts which are so hallowed
and so dense that their only use is to excite emotions and to obscure
insight. [p261] how many of us really know what we are talking
about when we use words like the state, sovereignty, independence,
democracy, representative government, national honor, liberty, and
loyalty? very few of us, i think, could define any of these terms
under cross-examination, though we are prepared to shed blood, or at
least ink, in their behalf. these terms have ceased to be intellectual
instruments for apprehending the facts we have to deal with and have
become push buttons which touch off emotional reflexes.

as good a way as any to raise the temperature of political debate is to
talk about loyalty. everybody regards himself as loyal and resents any
imputation upon his loyalty, yet even a cursory inspection of this term
will show, i think, that it may mean any number of different things.
it is clearest when used in a military sense. a loyal soldier is one
who obeys his superior officer. a loyal officer is one who obeys his
commander-in-chief. but just exactly what is a loyal commander-in-chief
cannot be told so easily. he is loyal to the nation. he is loyal to the
best interests of the nation. but what those best interests may be,
whether they mean making peace or carrying the war into the enemy’s
country, is an exceedingly debatable question. when the citizen’s
loyalty is in question the whole matter becomes immensely subtle. must
he be loyal to every law and every command issued by the established
authorities, kings, legislators, and aldermen? there are many who would
say that this is the definition of civic loyalty, to obey the law
without qualifications while it is a law. but such definition puts the
taint of disloyalty on almost all citizens [p262] of the modern state.
for the fact is that all the laws on the books are not even known, and
that a considerable portion are entirely disregarded, and many it is
impossible to obey. the definition, moreover, places outside the pale
many who rank as great patriots, men who defied the law out of loyalty
to some principle which the lawmakers have rejected. but what makes
matters even more complicated is the fact that in modern communities
the principle is accepted that the commands of the established
authorities not only may be criticized but that they ought to be.

at this stage of political development the military element in
loyalty has virtually disappeared. the idea of toleration, of freedom
of speech, and above all the idea of organized opposition, alters
radically the attributes of the sovereign. for a sovereign who has to
be obeyed but not believed in, whose decisions are legitimate matters
of dispute, who may be displaced by his bitterest opponents, has lost
all semblance of omnipotence and omniscience. “he has sovereignty,”
wrote jean bodin, “who, after god, acknowledges no one greater than
himself.” our governors command only for the time being—and within
strict limits. their authority is only such as they can win and hold.
political loyalty under these conditions, whatever else it may be,
is certainly not unqualified allegiance to those who hold office, to
the policies they pursue, or even to the laws they enact. neither the
government as it exists, nor its conduct, nor even the constitution by
which it operates, exercises any ultimate claim upon the loyalty of the
citizen. the most one can say, i think, is that the loyal citizen is
one who loves his country and regards the status quo as an arrangement
which he [p263] is at liberty to modify only by argument, according to
well-understood rules, without violence, and with due regard for the
interests and opinions of his fellow men. if he is loyal to this ideal
of political conduct he is as loyal as the modern state can force him
to be, or as it is desirable that he should be.


2. _the evolution of loyalty_

broadly speaking, the evolution of political loyalty passes through
three phases. in the earliest, the most primitive, and for almost all
men the most natural, loyalty is allegiance to a chieftain; in the
middle phase it tends to become allegiance to an institution—that is
to say, to a corporate, rather than to a human, personality; and in the
last phase it becomes allegiance to a pattern of conduct. the kind of
government which any community is capable of operating is very largely
determined by the kind of loyalty of which its members are capable.

it is plain, for example, that among a people who are capable only of
loyalty to another human being the political system is bound to take
the shape of a hierarchy, in which each man is loyal to his superior,
and the man at the top is loyal to god alone. such a society will be
feudal, military, theocratic. if it is successfully organized it will
be an ordered despotism, culminating, as the feudal system did, in
god’s vice-gerent on earth. if it is unsuccessfully organized, as for
example, in the more backward countries of central america to-day,
the system of personal allegiances will produce little factions each
with its chief, all of them contending for, without quite achieving,
absolute power. this type of organization is so fundamentally [p264]
human that it prevails even in communities which think they have
outgrown it. thus it appears in what americans call a political
machine, which is nothing but a hierarchy of professional politicians
held together by profitable personal loyalties. the political boss
is a demilitarized chieftain in the direct line of descent from his
prototypes.

the modern world has come to regard organization on the basis of human
allegiances as alien and dangerous. yet the political machine exists
even in the most advanced communities. the reason for that is obvious.
with the enfranchisement of virtually the whole adult population,
political power has passed into the hands of a great mass of people
most of whom are altogether incapable of loyalty to institutions,
much less to ideas. they do not understand them. for these voters
the only kind of political behavior is through allegiance to a human
superior, and modern democracies are considered fortunate if the
political leaders and bosses on whom these human allegiances converge
are relatively loyal to the institutions of the country. this, for
example, is the meaning of the dramatic speech in which president
calles on september 1, 1928, voluntarily renounced the continuation of
his own dictatorship. “for the first time in mexican history,” he said,
“the republic faces a situation (owing to the assassination of general
obregon) whose dominant note is the lack of a military leader, which
is going to make it finally possible for us to direct the policy of
the country into truly institutional channels, striving to pass once
for all from our historical condition of one-man rule to the higher,
more dignified, more useful, and more civilized condition of a nation
of laws and institutions.” it is [p265] hardly to be supposed that
president calles thought that the mexican people as a whole could pass
once for all from their historical condition of one-man rule. what he
meant was that the political chieftains to whom the people were loyal
ought thereafter to arrange the succession and to exercise power not
as seemed desirable to them, or as they might imagine that god had
privately commanded them, but in accordance with objective rules of
political conduct.

the conceptions of sovereignty which we inherit are derived from the
primitive system of personal allegiances. that is why the conception
of sovereignty has become increasingly confused as modern civilization
has become more complex. in the middle ages the theory reached its
symmetrical perfection. mankind was conceived as a great organism in
which the spiritual and temporal hierarchies were united as the soul
is united with the body in “an inseverable connection and an unbroken
interaction which must display itself in every part and also throughout
the whole.” but of course even in the middle ages the symmetry of this
conception was marred by the fierce disputes between the emperors and
the popes. after the sixteenth century the whole conception began to
disintegrate. there appeared a congeries of monarchs each claiming to
rule in his territory by divine right. but obviously when there are
many agents of the lord ruling men, and when they do not agree, the
theory of sovereignty in its moral aspects is in grave difficulties.

as time went on, limitations of all kinds began to be imposed upon
sovereigns. the existence at the same time of many sovereigns produced
the need of international law, for obviously there could have been no
international [p266] law in a world where all of mankind, barring
infidels who did not have to be considered, were under one sovereign
power. the limitations imposed by international law from without were
accompanied by limitations imposed from within.

these limitations from within were based on quite practical
considerations. there grew up slowly in the middle ages the idea
that the state originated “in a contract of subjection made between
people and ruler.” the first modern writer to argue effectively that
government was based not on a warrant from the lord, but on a “social
compact” is said to have been richard hooker, a clergyman of the
established church, who held, in 1594, that the royal authority was
derived from a contract between the king and the people. this idea
soon became popular, for it suited the needs of all those who did not
participate in the privileges of the absolute monarchy. it suited not
only the church of england, when as in hooker’s time it was assailed,
but also the dissenting churches, and then the rising middle class
whose ambitions were frustrated by the landed nobles with the king at
their head. the doctrine of the social compact was expounded in many
different forms in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries by men like
milton, spinoza, hobbes, locke, and rousseau.

as an historical theory to explain the origin of human society it
is of course demonstrably false, but as a weapon for breaking up
the concentration of sovereign power and distributing it, the idea
has played a mighty role in history. it is almost certain to appear
wherever there is an absolutism which men feel the need of checking.
but the [p267] theory of the social compact disappears when power
has become so widely diffused that no one can any longer locate
the sovereign. that is what is happening in the advanced modern
communities. the sovereign, whom it was once desirable to put under
contract, has become so anonymous and diffuse that his very existence
to-day is a legal fiction rather than a political fact. and loyalty
by the same token is no longer provided with a personal superior of
indubitable prestige to which it can be attached.


3. _pluralism_

the relationship between lord and vassals in which each man attaches
himself for better or worse to some superior person tends gradually to
disappear in the modern world. its passing was somewhat prematurely
announced by the declaration of the rights of man; it did not wholly
disappear by the dissolution of the bonds which bound one man to
another, for the psychological bonds are stronger than the legal.
nevertheless the effect of modern civilization is to dissolve these
psychological bonds, to break up clannishness and personal dependence.
men and women alike tend to become more or less independent persons
rather than to remain members of a social organism.

the reason for this lies in the diversification of their interests.
life in the ancestral order was not only simpler and contained within
narrower limits than it is to-day, but there was a far greater unity
in the activity of each individual. working the land, fighting,
raising a family, worshipping, were so closely related that they could
be governed by a very simple allegiance to the chief of the tribe
[p268] or the lord of the manor. in the modern world this synthesis
has disintegrated and the activities of a man cannot be directed by a
simple allegiance. each man finds himself the center of a complex of
loyalties. he is loyal to his government, he is loyal to his state, he
is loyal to his village, he is loyal to his neighborhood. he has his
own family. he has his wife’s family. his wife has her family. he has
his church. his wife may have a different church. he may be an employer
of thousands of men. he may be an employee. he must be loyal to his
corporation, to his trade union, or his professional society. he is
a buyer in many different markets. he is a seller in many different
markets. he is a creditor and a debtor. he owns shares in several
industries. he belongs to a political party, to clubs, to a social set.
the multiplicity of his interests makes it impossible for him to give
his whole allegiance to any person or to any institution.

it may be, in fact for most men it must be, that in each of these
associations he follows a leader. in any considerable number of people
it is certain that they will group themselves in hierarchical form.
in every club, in every social circle, in every trade union, in every
stockholders’ meeting there are leaders and their lieutenants and the
led. but these allegiances are partial. because a man has so many
loyalties each loyalty commands only a segment of himself. they are
not, therefore, whole-hearted loyalties like that of a good soldier
to his captain. they are qualified, calculated, debatable, and they
are sanctioned not by inherent authority but by expediency or inertia.
[p269]

the outward manifestation of these complex loyalties of the modern man
is the multitude of institutions through which the affairs of mankind
are directed. now since each of these corporate entities represents
only a part of any man’s interest, except perhaps in the case of the
paid executive secretary, none of these institutions can count to the
bitter end upon the undivided loyalty of all its members. the conflicts
between institutions are in considerable measure conflicts of interest
within the same individuals. there is a point where the activity of a
man’s trade union may so seriously affect the value of the securities
he owns that he does not know which way his interest lies. the
criss-crossing of loyalties is so great in an advanced community that
no grouping is self-contained. no grouping, therefore, can maintain a
military discipline or a military character. for when men strive too
fiercely as members of any one group they soon find that they are at
war with themselves as members of another group.

the statement that modern society is pluralistic cannot, then, be
dismissed as a newfangled notion invented by theorists. it is a sober
description of the actual facts. each man has countless interests
through which he is attached to a very complex social situation.
the complexity of his allegiance cannot fail to be reflected in his
political conduct.


4. _live and let live_

one of the inevitable effects of being attached to many different,
somewhat conflicting, interdependent groupings is to blunt the edges
of partisanship. it is possible to [p270] be fiercely partisan only
as against those who are wholly alien. it is a fair generalization to
say that the fiercest democrats are to be found where there are the
fewest republicans, the most bloodthirsty patriots in the safest swivel
chairs. where men are personally entangled with the groups that are
in potential conflict, where democrats and republicans belong to the
same country club and where protestants and catholics marry each other,
it is psychologically impossible to be sharply intolerant. that is
why astute directors of corporations adopt the policy of distributing
their securities as widely as they can; they know quite well that
even the most modest shareholder is in some measure insulated against
anti-corporate agitation. it is inherent in the complex pluralism of
the modern world that men should behave moderately, and experience
amply confirms this conclusion.

there is little doubt that in the great metropolitan centers there
exists a disposition to live and let live, to give and take, to agree
and to agree to differ, which is not to be found in simple homogeneous
communities. in complex communities life quickly becomes intolerable if
men are intolerant. for they are in daily contact with almost everybody
and everything they could conceivably wish to persecute. their victims
would be their customers, their employees, their landlords, their
tenants and perhaps their wives’ relations. but in a simple community
a kind of pastoral intolerance for everything alien adds a quaint
flavor to living. for the most part it vents itself in the open air.
the terrible indictments drawn up in a mississippi village against the
pope in rome, the russian nation, the vices of paris, and the [p271]
enormities of new york are in the main quite lyrical. the pope may
never even know what the mississippi preacher thinks of him and new
york continues to go to, but never apparently to reach, hell.

when an agitator wishes to start a crusade, a religious revival, an
inquisition, or some sort of jingo excitement, the further he goes from
the centers of modern civilization the more following he can attract.
it is in the backwoods and in the hill country, in kitchens and in
old men’s clubs, that fanaticism can be kindled. the urban crowd, if
it has been urban for any length of time and has become used to its
environment, may be fickle, faddish, nervous, unstable, but it lacks
the concentration of energy to become fiercely excited for any length
of time about anything. at its worst it is a raging mob, but it is
not persistently fanatical. there are too many things to attract its
attention for it to remain preoccupied for long with any one thing.

to responsible men of affairs the complexity of modern civilization is
a daily lesson in the necessity of not pressing any claim too far, of
understanding opposing points of view, of seeking to reconcile them, of
conducting matters so that there is some kind of harmony in a plural
society. this accounts, i think, for the increasing use of political
devices which are wholly unknown in simpler societies. there is, for
example, the ideal of a civil service. it is wholly modern and it is
quite revolutionary. for it assumes that a great deal of the business
of the state can and must be carried on by a class of men who have no
personal and no party allegiance, who are in fact neutral in politics
and concerned only with the execution [p272] of a task. i know how
imperfectly the civil service works, but that it should exist at all,
and that the ideal it embodies should be generally acknowledged,
is profound testimony as to how inherent in the modern situation
is the concept of disinterestedness. the theory of an independent
judiciary arises out of the same need for disinterested judgment.
even more significant, perhaps, is the use in all political debates
of the evidence of technicians, experts, and neutral investigators.
the statesman who imagined he had thought up a solution for a social
problem while he was in his bath would be a good deal of a joke; even
if he had stumbled on a good idea, he would not dare to commit himself
to it without elaborate preliminary surveys, investigations, hearings,
conferences, and the like.

men occupying responsible posts in the great society have become aware,
in short, that their guesses and their prejudices are untrustworthy,
and that successful decisions can be made only in a neutral spirit by
comparing their hypotheses with their understanding of reality.


5. _government in the people_

it has been the cause of considerable wonder to many persons that the
most complex modern communities, where the old loyalties are most
completely dissolved, where authority has so little prestige, where
moral codes are held in such small esteem, should nevertheless have
proved to be far more impervious to the strain of war and revolution
than the older and simpler types of civilization. it has been russia,
china, poland, italy, spain, rather than england, germany, belgium,
and the united states which have been most disorderly in the post-war
[p273] period. the contrary might have been expected. it might well
have been anticipated that the highly organized, delicately poised
social mechanisms would disintegrate the most easily.

yet it is now evident why modern civilization is so durable. its
strength lies in its sensitiveness. the effect of bad decisions is
so quickly felt, the consequences are so inescapably serious, that
corrective action is almost immediately set in motion. a simple society
like russia can let its railroads go gradually to wrack and ruin, but
a complex society like london or new york is instantly disorganized
if the railroads do not run on schedule. so many persons are at once
affected in so many vitally important ways that remedies have to be
found immediately. this does not mean that modern states are governed
as wisely as they should be, or that they do not neglect much that they
cannot really afford to neglect. they blunder along badly enough in all
conscience. there is nevertheless a minimum of order and of necessary
services which they have to provide for themselves. they have to keep
going. they cannot afford the luxury of prolonged disorder or of a
general paralysis. their own necessities are dependent on such fragile
structures, and everyone is so much affected, that when a modern state
is in trouble it can draw upon incomparable reserves of public spirit.

“i made ninety-one local committees in ninety-one local communities to
look after the mississippi flood,” mr. hoover once explained, “that’s
what i principally did.... you say: ‘a couple of thousand refugees are
coming. they’ve got to have accommodations. huts. [p274] water-mains.
sewers. streets. dining-halls. meals. doctors. everything.’... so
you go away and they go ahead and just simply do it. of all those
ninety-one committees there was just one that fell down.” mr. hard,
who reports these remarks, goes on to make mr. hoover say that: “no
other main street in the world could have done what the american
main street did in the mississippi flood; and europe may jeer as it
pleases at our mass production and our mass organization and our mass
education. the safety of the united states is its multitudinous mass
leadership.” allowing for the fact that these remarks appeared in a
campaign biography at a time when mr. hoover’s friends were rather
concerned about demonstrating the intensity of his patriotism, there
is nevertheless substantial truth in them. i am inclined to believe
that “multitudinous mass leadership” will be found wherever industrial
society is firmly established, that is to say, wherever a people has
lived with the machine process long enough to acquire the aptitudes
that it calls for. this capacity to organize, to administer affairs,
to deal realistically with necessity, can hardly be due to some
congenital superiority in the american people. they are, after all
only transplanted europeans. that their aptitudes may be somewhat more
highly developed is not, however, inconceivable: the new civilization
may have developed more freely in a land where it did not have to
contend with the institutions of a military, feudal, and clerical
society.

the essential point is that as the machine technology makes social
relations complex, it dissolves the habits of obedience and dependence;
it disintegrates the centralization [p275] of power and of leadership;
it diffuses the experience of responsible decision throughout the
population, compelling each man to acquire the habit of making
judgments instead of looking for orders, of adjusting his will to the
wills of others instead of trusting to custom and organic loyalties.
the real law under which modern society is administered is neither the
accumulated precedents of tradition nor a set of commands originating
on high which are imposed like orders in an army upon the rank and file
below. the real law in the modern state is the multitude of little
decisions made daily by millions of men.

because this is so, the character of government is changing radically.
this change is obscured for us in our theorizing by the fact that our
political ideas derive from a different kind of social experience.
we think of governing as the act of a person; for the actual king we
have tried to substitute a corporate king, which we call the nation,
the people, the majority, public opinion, or the general will. but
none of these entities has the attributes of a king, and the failure
of political thinking to lay the ghosts of monarchy leads to endless
misunderstanding. the crucial difference between modern politics and
that to which mankind has been accustomed is that the power to act and
to compel obedience is almost never sufficiently centralized nowadays
to be exercised by one will. the power is distributed and qualified so
that power is exerted not by command but by interaction.

the prime business of government, therefore, is not to direct the
affairs of the community, but to harmonize the direction which the
community gives to its affairs. [p276] the congress of the united
states, for example, does not consult the conscience and its god and
then decree a tariff law. it enacts the kind of tariff which at the
moment represents the most stable compromise among the interests which
have made themselves heard. the law may be outrageously unfair. but if
it is, that is because those whose interests are neglected did not at
that time have the power to make themselves felt. if the law favors
manufacturers rather than farmers, it is because the manufacturers
at that time have greater weight in the social equilibrium than the
farmers. that may sound hard. but it is doubtful whether a modern
legislature can make laws effective if those laws are not the formal
expression of what the persons actually affected can and wish to do.

the amount of law is relatively small which a modern legislature can
successfully impose. the reason for this is that unless the enforcement
of the law is taken in hand by the citizenry, the officials as such
are quite helpless. it is possible to enforce the law of contracts,
because the injured party will sue; it is possible to enforce the law
against burglary, because almost everybody will report a burglary to
the police. but it is not possible to enforce the old-fashioned speed
laws on the highways because the police are too few and far between,
the pedestrians are uninterested, and motorists like to speed. there is
here a very fundamental principle of modern lawmaking: insofar as a law
depends upon the initiative of officials in detecting violations and in
prosecuting, that law will almost certainly be difficult to enforce. if
a considerable part of the population is hostile to the law, and if the
[p277] majority has only a platonic belief in it, the law will surely
break down. for what gives law reality is not that it is commanded by
the sovereign but that it brings the organized force of the state to
the aid of those citizens who believe in the law.

what the government really does is not to rule men, but to add
overwhelming force to men when they rule their affairs. the passage
of a law is in effect a promise that the police, the courts, and the
officials will defend and enforce certain rights when citizens choose
to exercise them. for all practical purposes this is just as true when
what was once a private wrong to be redressed by private action in law
courts on proof of specific injury has been made by statute a public
wrong which is preventable and punishable by administrative action.
when the citizens are no longer interested in preventing or punishing
specific instances of what the statute declares is a public wrong, the
statute becomes a dead letter. the principle is most obviously true in
the case of a sumptuary law like prohibition. the reason prohibition
is unenforceable in the great cities is that the citizens will not
report the names and addresses of their bootleggers to the prohibition
officials. but the principle is no less true in less obvious cases,
as, for example, in tariffs or laws to regulate railroads. thus it is
difficult to enforce the tariff law on jewels, for they are easily
smuggled. insofar as the law is enforced it is because jewelers find
it profitable to maintain an organization which detects smuggling.
because they know the ins and outs of the trade, and have men in all
the jewelry markets of the world who have an interest in catching
smugglers, it is possible for the united [p278] states government to
make a fair showing in administering the law. the government cannot
from hour to hour inspect all the transactions of its people, and
any law which rests on the premise that government can do this is
a foolish law. the railroad laws are enforced because shippers are
vigilant. the criminal laws depend upon how earnestly citizens object
to certain kinds of crime. in fact it may be said that laws which make
certain kinds of conduct illicit are effective insofar as the breach
of these laws arouses the citizenry to call in the police and to take
the trouble to help the police. it is not enough that the mass of the
population should be law-abiding. a minority can stultify the law if
the population as a whole is not also law-enforcing.

this is the real sense in which it can be said that power in the modern
state resides not in the government but in the people. as that phrase
is usually employed it alleges that ‘the people,’ as articulated by
elected officials, can govern by command as the monarch or tribal
chieftain once governed. in this sense government by the people is a
delusion. what we have among advanced communities is something that
might perhaps be described as government in the people. the naively
democratic theory was that out of the mass of the voters there arose a
cloud of wills which ascended to heaven, condensed into a thunderbolt,
and then smote the people. it was supposed that the opinion of masses
of persons somehow became the opinion of a corporate person called the
people, and that this corporate person then directed human affairs like
a monarch. but that is not what happens. government is in the people
and stays there. government is [p279] their multitudinous decisions in
concrete situations, and what officials do is to assist and facilitate
this process of governing. effective laws may be said to register an
understanding among those concerned by which the law-abiding know
what to expect and what is expected of them; they are insured with
all the force that the state commands against the disruption of this
understanding by the recalcitrant minority. in the modern state a law
which does not register the inward assent of most of those who are
affected will have very little force as against the breakers of that
law. for it is only by that inward assent that power becomes mobilized
to enforce the law. the government in the person of its officials, its
paltry inspectors and policemen, has relatively little power of its
own. it derives its power from the people in amounts which vary with
the circumstances of each law. that is why the same government may act
with invincible majesty in one place and with ludicrous futility in
another.


6. _politicians and statesmen_

the role of the leader would be easier to define if it were agreed
to give separate meanings to two very common words. i mean the words
“politician” and “statesman.” in popular usage a vague distinction
is recognized: to call a man a statesman is eulogy, to call him a
politician is to be, however faintly, disparaging. the dictionary, in
fact, defines a politician as one who seeks to subserve the interests
of a political party _merely_; as an afterthought it defines him as
one skilled in political science: a statesman. and in defining a
statesman the [p280] dictionary says that he is a political leader of
distinguished ability.

these definitions can, i think, be improved upon by clarifying the
meanings which are vaguely intended in popular usage. when we think
offhand of a politician we think of a man who works for a partial
interest. at the worst it is his own pocket. at the best it may be
his party, his class, or an institution with which he is identified.
we never feel that he can or will take into account all the interests
concerned, and because bias and partisanship are the qualities of
his conduct, we feel, unless we are naively afflicted with the same
bias, that he is not to be trusted too far. now the word ‘statesman,’
when it is not mere pomposity, connotes a man whose mind is elevated
sufficiently above the conflict of contending parties to enable him to
adopt a course of action which takes into account a greater number of
interests in the perspective of a longer period of time. it is some
such conception as this that edmund burke had in mind when he wrote
that the state “ought not to be considered as nothing better than a
partnership in a trade of pepper and coffee, calico or tobacco, or
some other such low concern, to be taken up for a little temporary
interest and to be dissolved by the fancy of the parties.... it is a
partnership in a higher and more permanent sense—a partnership in all
science; a partnership in all art; a partnership in every virtue and in
all perfection. as the ends of such a partnership cannot be obtained
in many generations it becomes a partnership not only between those
who are living, but between those who are dead and those who are to be
born.” [p281]

the politician, then, is a man who seeks to attain the special objects
of particular interests. if he is the leader of a political party he
will try either to purchase the support of particular interests by
specific pledges, or if that is impracticable, he will employ some
form of deception. i include under the term ‘deception’ the whole art
of propaganda, whether it consists of half-truths, lies, ambiguities,
evasions, calculated silence, red herrings, unresponsiveness, slogans,
catchwords, showmanship, bathos, hokum, and buncombe. they are, one and
all, methods of preventing a disinterested inquiry into the situation.
i do not say that any one can be elected to office without employing
deception, though i am inclined to think that there is a new school of
political reporters in the land who with a kind of beautiful cruelty
are making it rather embarrassing for politicians to employ their old
tricks. a man may have to be a politician to be elected when there is
adult suffrage, and it may be that statesmanship, in the sense in which
i am using the term, cannot occupy the whole attention of any public
man. it is true at least that it never does.

the reason for this is that in order to hold office a man must array in
his support a varied assortment of persons with all sorts of confused
and conflicting purposes. when then, it may be asked, does he begin to
be a statesman? he begins whenever he stops trying merely to satisfy or
to obfuscate the momentary wishes of his constituents, and sets out to
make them realize and assent to those hidden interests of theirs which
are permanent because they fit the facts and can be harmonized with the
interests of their neighbors. the politician says: “i [p282] will give
you what you want.” the statesman says: “what you think you want is
this. what it is possible for you to get is that. what you really want,
therefore, is the following.” the politician stirs up a following; the
statesman leads it. the politician, in brief, accepts unregenerate
desire at its face value and either fulfills it or perpetrates a fraud;
the statesman re-educates desire by confronting it with the reality,
and so makes possible an enduring adjustment of interests within the
community.

the chief element in the art of statesmanship under modern conditions
is the ability to elucidate the confused and clamorous interests which
converge upon the seat of government. it is an ability to penetrate
from the naive self-interest of each group to its permanent and real
interest. it is a difficult art which requires great courage, deep
sympathy, and a vast amount of information. that is why it is so rare.
but when a statesman is successful in converting his constituents from
a childlike pursuit of what seems interesting to a realistic view of
their interests, he receives a kind of support which the ordinary glib
politician can never hope for. candor is a bitter pill when first it is
tasted but it is full of health, and once a man becomes established in
the public mind as a person who deals habitually and successfully with
real things, he acquires an eminence of a wholly different quality from
that of even the most celebrated caterer to the popular favor. his hold
on the people is enduring because he promises nothing which he cannot
achieve; he proposes nothing which turns out to be a fake. sooner or
later the politician, because he deals in unrealities, is found out.
then he either goes to jail, or he is tolerated [p283] cynically as a
picturesque and amiable scoundrel; or he retires and ceases to meddle
with the destinies of men. the words of a statesman prove to have value
because they express not the desires of the moment but the conditions
under which desires can actually be adjusted to reality. his projects
are policies which lay down an ordered plan of action in which all the
elements affected will, after they have had some experience of it,
find it profitable to co-operate. his laws register what the people
really desire when they have clarified their wants. his laws have force
because they mobilize the energies which alone can make laws effective.

it is not necessary, nor is it probable, that a statesmanlike policy
will win such assent when it is first proposed. nor is it necessary
for the statesman to wait until he has won complete assent. there are
many things which people cannot understand until they have lived with
them for a while. often, therefore, the great statesman is bound to
act boldly in advance of his constituents. when he does this he stakes
his judgment as to what the people will in the end find to be good
against what the people happen ardently to desire. this capacity to
act upon the hidden realities of a situation in spite of appearances
is the essence of statesmanship. it consists in giving the people
not what they want but what they will learn to want. it requires the
courage which is possible only in a mind that is detached from the
agitations of the moment. it requires the insight which comes only from
an objective and discerning knowledge of the facts, and a high and
imperturbable disinterestedness.




chapter xiv [p284]

love in the great society


1. _the external control of sexual conduct_

while the changes which modernity implies affect the premises of
all human conduct, the problem as a whole engages the attention of
relatively few persons. the larger number of men and women living
within the orbit of the great society are no doubt aware that their
inherited beliefs about religion, politics, business, and sex do not
square entirely with the actual beliefs upon which they feel compelled
to act. but the fundamental alterations in political and economic
ideals which the machine technology is inducing come home to each man
only indirectly and partially. the consequences are subtle, delayed,
and what is even more important, they are outside the scope of the
ordinary man’s personal decision. there is little that is urgent,
immediate, or decisive which he can do, even if he understands them,
about the changes in the structure and purpose of industry and the
state. most men can manage, therefore, to live without ever attempting
to decide for themselves any fundamental question about business or
politics. but they can neither ignore changes in sexual relations nor
do they wish to. it is possible for a man to be a socialist or an
individualist without ever having to make one responsible decision
in which his theories play any part. but what he thinks [p285]
about divorce and contraception, continence and license, monogamy,
prostitution, and sexual experience outside of marriage, are matters
that are bound at some point in his life to affect his own happiness
immediately and directly. it is possible to be hypocritical about
sex. but it is not possible for any adult who is not anæsthetic to be
indifferent. the affairs of state may be regulated by leaders. but the
affairs of a man and a woman are inescapably their own.

that obviously is the reason why in the popular mind it is immediately
assumed that when morals are discussed it is sexual morals that are
meant. the morals of the politician and the voter, of the shareholder
and executive and employee, are only moderately interesting to the
general public: thus they almost never supply the main theme of popular
fiction. but the relation between boy and girl, man and woman, husband
and wife, mistress and lover, parents and children, are themes which
no amount of repetition makes stale. the explanation is obvious. the
modern audience is composed of persons among whom only a comparatively
negligible few are serenely happy in their personal lives. popular
fiction responds to their longings: to the unappeased it offers some
measure of vicarious satisfaction, to the prurient an indulgence, to
the worried, if not a way out, then at least the comfort of knowing
that their secret despair is a common, and not a unique, experience.

yet in spite of this immense preoccupation with sex it is
extraordinarily difficult to arrive at any reliable knowledge of what
actual change in human behavior it reflects. this is not surprising.
in fact this is the very [p286] essence of the matter. the reason it
is difficult to know the actual facts about sexual behavior in modern
society is that sexual behavior eludes observation and control. we know
that the old conventions have lost most of their authority because we
cannot know about, and therefore can no longer regulate, the sexual
behavior of others. it may be that there is, as some optimists believe,
a fine but candid restraint practiced among modern men and women. it
may be that incredible licentiousness exists all about us, as the
gloomier prophets insist. it may be that there is just about as much
unconventional conduct and no more than there has always been. nobody,
i think, really knows. nobody knows whether the conversation about
sex reflects more promiscuity or less hypocrisy. but what everybody
must know is that sexual conduct, whatever it may be, is regulated
personally and not publicly in modern society. if there is restraint it
is, in the last analysis, voluntary; if there is promiscuity, it can be
quite secret.

the circumstances which have wrought this change are inherent in modern
ways of living. until quite recently the main conventions of sex were
enforced first by the parents and then by the husband through their
control over the life of the woman. the main conventions were: first,
that she must not encourage or display any amorous inclinations except
where there was practical certainty that the young man’s intentions
were serious; second, that when she was married to the young man
she submitted to his embraces only because the lord somehow failed
to contrive a less vile method of perpetuating the species. all the
minor conventions were [p287] subsidiary to these; the whole system
was organized on the premise that procreation was the woman’s only
sanction for sexual intercourse. such control as was exercised over
the conduct of men was subordinate to this control over the conduct of
women. the chastity of women before marriage was guarded; that meant
that seduction was a crime, but that relations with “lost” or unchaste
women were tolerated. the virtuous man, by popular standards, was one
who before his marriage did not have sexual relations with a virtuous
woman. there is ample testimony in the outcries of moralists that even
in the olden days these conventions were not perfectly administered.
but they were sufficiently well administered to remain the accepted
conventions, honored even in the breach. it was possible, because of
the way people lived, to administer them.

the woman lived a sheltered life. that is another way of saying
that she lived under the constant inspection of her family. she
lived at home. she worked at home. she met young men under the
zealous chaperonage of practically the whole community. no doubt,
couples slipped away occasionally and more went on than was known or
acknowledged. but even then there was a very powerful deterrent against
an illicit relationship. this deterrent was the fear of pregnancy.
that in the end made it almost certain that if a secret affair were
consummated it could not be kept secret and that terrible penalties
would be exacted. in the modern world effective chaperonage has become
impracticable and the fear of pregnancy has been virtually eliminated
by the very general knowledge of contraceptive methods. [p288]

the whole revolution in the field of sexual morals turns upon the fact
that external control of the chastity of women is becoming impossible.


2. _birth control_

the biblical account of how jehovah slew onan for disobeying his
father’s commandment to go to his brother’s widow, tamar, and “perform
the duty of an husband’s brother,” shows that the deliberate prevention
of conception is not a new discovery. mr. harold cox must be right when
he says “it is fairly certain that in all ages and in all countries
men and women have practiced various devices to prevent conception
while continuing to indulge in sexual intercourse.” for while i know
of no positive evidence to support this, it appears to be self-evident
that the human race within historical times has not multiplied up to
the limits of human fecundity. since it is hardly probable that this
has been due to the continence of husbands, nor wholly to infanticide,
abortion, infant mortality, and postponement of marriage, it is safe to
conclude that birth control is an ancient practice.

nevertheless, it was not until the nineteenth century that the
practice of contraception began to be publicly advocated on grounds
of public policy. until the industrial age the weight of opinion was
overwhelmingly in favor of very large families. kings and nobles needed
soldiers and retainers: “as arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are
the children of youth. happy is the man that hath his quiver full of
them. they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies
in the [p289] gate.” fathers of families desired many sons. the early
factory owners could use abundant cheap labor. there had been men from
plato’s time who had their doubts about the value of an indefinitely
growing population. but the substantial opinion down to the end of
the eighteenth century was adam smith’s that: “the most decisive mark
of the prosperity of any country is the increase of the number of its
inhabitants.”

apparently it was the sinister character of the early factory system,
and the ominous unrest which pervaded europe after the french
revolution, which rather suddenly changed into pessimism this bland
optimism about an ever growing population. malthus published the first
edition of his _essay on population_ in 1798. this book is undoubtedly
one of the great landmarks of human culture, for it focussed the
attention of europe on the necessity of regulating the growth of
population. malthus himself, it seems, hoped that this regulation
could be achieved by the postponement of marriage and by continence.
it is not clear whether he disapproved of what is now called
neo-malthusianism, or whether he did not regard it as practicable.
nevertheless, within less than twenty-five years james mill in the
_encyclopædia britannica_ had in guarded fashion put forward the
neo-malthusian principle, and shortly thereafter, that is in 1823, an
active public propaganda was set on foot, most probably by francis
place, by means of what were known as the “diabolical handbills.”
these leaflets were addressed to the working classes and contained
descriptions of methods for preventing conception. some of them were
sent to a good lady named mrs. fildes, who [p290] indignantly, but
mistakenly from her point of view, assisted the nefarious propaganda
by exposing it in the public prints. fifty years later mr. bradlaugh
and mrs. besant had themselves indicted and tried for selling an
illustrated edition of knowlton’s _fruits of philosophy_. after that
advertisement, neo-malthusian principles and practices were known and
were, therefore, available to all but the poorest and most illiterate.

no propaganda so threatening to the established moral order ever
encountered such an ineffective opposition. i do not know how much
money has been spent on the propaganda nor how many martyrs have had
to coerce reluctant judges to try them. but it is evident that once it
was known that fairly dependable methods of contraception exist, the
people took the matter into their own hands. for the public reasons by
which neo-malthusianism was justified were also private reasons. the
social philosopher said that population must be adjusted to the means
of subsistence. man and wife said that they must have only as many
children as they could afford to rear. the eugenist said that certain
stocks ought not to multiply. individual women decided that too many
children, or even any children, were bad for their health. but these
were not the only reasons which explain the demand for neo-malthusian
knowledge. there was also the very plain demand due to a desire to
enjoy sexual intercourse without social consequences.

on this aspect of birth control the liberal reformers have, i think,
been until recently more than a little disingenuous. they have been
arguing for the removal of the prohibitory laws, and they have built
their case on two [p291] main theses. they have argued, first, that
the limitation of births was sound public policy for economic and
eugenic reasons; and second, that it was necessary to the happiness
of families, the health of mothers, and the welfare of children. all
these reasons may be unimpeachable. i think they are. but it was idle
to pretend that the dissemination of this knowledge, even if legally
confined to the instruction of married women by licensed physicians,
could be kept from the rest of the adult population. obviously that
which all married couples are permitted to know every one is bound
to know. human curiosity will make that certain. now this is what
the christian churches, especially the roman catholic, which oppose
contraception on principle, instantly recognized. they were quite
right. they were quite right, too, in recognizing that whether or
not birth control is eugenic, hygienic, and economic, it is the most
revolutionary practice in the history of sexual morals.

for when conception could be prevented, there was an end to the theory
that woman submits to the embrace of the male only for purposes of
procreation. she had to be persuaded to co-operate, and no possible
reason could be advanced except that the pleasure was reciprocal.
she had to understand and inwardly assent to the principle that it
is proper to have sexual intercourse with her husband and to prevent
conception. she had, therefore, to give up the whole traditional theory
which she may have only half-believed anyway, that sexual intercourse
was an impure means to a noble end. she could no longer believe that
procreation alone mitigated the vileness of cohabiting with a man, and
so she had to change her valuation [p292] and accept it as inherently
delightful. thus by an inevitable process the practice of contraception
led husbands and wives to the conviction that they need not be in the
least ashamed of their desires for each other.

but this transvaluation of values within the sanctity of the marital
chamber could hardly be kept a secret. what had happened was that
married couples were indulging in the pleasures of sex because
they had learned how to isolate them from the responsibilities of
parenthood. when we talk about the unconventional theories of the
younger generation we might in all honesty take this fact into account.
they have had it demonstrated to them by their own parents, by those
in whom the administering of the conventions is vested, that under
certain circumstances it is legitimate and proper to gratify sexual
desire apart from any obligation to the family or to the race. they
have been taught that it is possible to do this, and that it may be
proper. therefore, the older generation could no longer argue that
sexual intercourse as such was evil. it could no longer argue that it
was obviously dangerous. it could only maintain that the psychological
consequences are serious if sexual gratification is not made incidental
to the enduring partnership of marriage and a home. that may be, in
fact, i think it can be shown to be, the real wisdom of the matter.
yet if it is the wisdom of the matter, it is a kind of wisdom which
men and women can acquire by experience alone. they do not have it
instinctively. they cannot be compelled to adopt it. they can only
learn to believe it.

that is a very different thing from submitting to a convention upheld
by all human and divine authority. [p293]


3. _the logic of birth control_

with contraception established as a more or less legitimate idea in
modern society, a vast discussion has ensued as to how the practice
of it can be rationalized. in this discussion the pace is set by
those who accept the apparent logic of contraception and are prepared
boldly to revise the sexual conventions accordingly. they take as
their major premise the obvious fact that by contraception it is
possible to dissociate procreation from gratification, and therefore
to pursue independently what mr. havelock ellis calls the primary and
secondary objects of the sexual impulse. they propose, therefore, to
sanction two distinct sets of conventions: one designed to protect
the interests of the offspring by promoting intelligent, secure, and
cheerful parenthood; the other designed to permit the freest and
fullest expression of the erotic personality. they propose, in other
words, to distinguish between parenthood as a vocation involving public
responsibility, and love as an art, pursued privately for the sake of
happiness.

as a preparation for the vocation of parenthood it is proposed
to educate both men and women in the care, both physical and
psychological, of children. it is proposed further that mating for
parenthood shall become an altogether deliberate and voluntary
choice: the argument here is that the duties of parenthood cannot
be successfully fulfilled except where both parents cheerfully and
knowingly assume them. therefore, it is proposed, in order to avert the
dangers of love at first sight and of mating under the blind compulsion
of instinct, that a period of free experimentation [p294] be allowed
to precede the solemn engagement to produce and rear children. this
engagement is regarded as so much a public responsibility that it is
even proposed, and to some extent has been embodied in the law of
certain jurisdictions, that marriages for parenthood must be sanctioned
by medical authority. in order, too, that no compulsive considerations
may determine what ought to be a free and intelligent choice, it is
argued that women should be economically independent before and during
marriage. as this may not be possible for women without property
of their own during the years when they are bearing and rearing
children, it is proposed in some form or other to endow motherhood.
this endowment may take the form of a legal claim upon the earnings of
the father, or it may mean a subsidy from the state through mothers’
pensions, free medical attention, day nurseries, and kindergartens. the
principle that successful parenthood must be voluntary is maintained
as consistently as possible. therefore, among those who follow the
logic of their idea, it is proposed that even marriages deliberately
entered into for procreation shall be dissoluble at the will of either
party, the state intervening only to insure the economic security of
the offspring. it is proposed, furthermore, that where women find the
vocation of motherhood impracticable for one reason or another, they
may be relieved of the duty of rearing their children.

not all of the advanced reformers adopt the whole of this program, but
the whole of this program is logically inherent in the conception of
parenthood as a vocation deliberately undertaken, publicly pursued, and
motivated solely by the parental instincts. [p295]

the separate set of conventions which it is proposed to adopt for the
development of love as an art have a logic of their own. their function
is not to protect the welfare of the child but the happiness of lovers.
it is very easy to misunderstand this conception. mr. havelock ellis,
in fact, describes it as a “divine and elusive mystery,” a description
which threatens to provide a rather elusive standard by which to fix a
new set of sexual conventions. but baffling as this sounds, it is not
wholly inscrutable, and a sufficient understanding of what is meant can
be attained by clearing up the dangerous ambiguity in the phrase “love
as an art.”

there are two arts of love and it makes a considerable difference
which one is meant. there is the art of love as casanova, for example,
practiced it. it is the art of seduction, courtship, and sexual
gratification: it is an art which culminates in the sexual act. it
can be repeated with the same lover and with other lovers, but it
exhausts itself in the moment of ecstasy. when that moment is reached,
the work of art is done, and the lover as artist “after an interval,
perhaps of stupor and vital recuperation” must start all over again,
until at last the rhythm is so stale it is a weariness to start at
all; or the lover must find new lovers and new resistances to conquer.
the aftermath of romantic love—that is, of love that is consummated
in sexual ecstasy—is either tedium in middle age or the compulsive
adventurousness of the libertine.

now this is not what mr. ellis means when he talks about love as an
art. “the act of intercourse,” he says, “is only an incident, and not
an essential in love.” incident to what? his answer is that it is an
incident to an [p296] “exquisitely and variously and harmoniously
blended” activity of “all the finer activities of the organism,
physical and psychic.” i take this to mean that when a man and woman
are successfully in love, their whole activity is energized and
victorious. they walk better, their digestion improves, they think
more clearly, their secret worries drop away, the world is fresh and
interesting, and they can do more than they dreamed that they could
do. in love of this kind sexual intimacy is not the dead end of desire
as it is in romantic or promiscuous love, but periodic affirmation of
the inward delight of desire pervading an active life. love of this
sort can grow: it is not, like youth itself, a moment that comes and is
gone and remains only a memory of something which cannot be recovered.
it can grow because it has something to grow upon and to grow with;
it is not contracted and stale because it has for its object, not the
mere relief of physical tension, but all the objects with which the
two lovers are concerned. they desire their worlds in each other, and
therefore their love is as interesting as their worlds and their worlds
are as interesting as their love.

it is to promote unions of this sort that the older liberals are
proposing a new set of sexual conventions. there are, however,
reformers in the field who take a much less exalted view of the sexual
act, who regard it, indeed, not only as without biological or social
significance, but also as without any very impressive psychological
significance. “the practice of birth control,” says mr. c. e. m. joad,
for example, “will profoundly modify our sexual habits. it will enable
the pleasures of sex to be tasted without its penalties, and it will
remove the most [p297] formidable deterrent to irregular intercourse.”
for birth control “offers to the young ... the prospect of shameless,
harmless, and unlimited pleasure.” but whether the reformers agree with
mr. ellis that sexual intimacy is, as he says, a sacrament signifying
some great spiritual reality, or with mr. joad that it is a harmless
pleasure, they are agreed that the sexual conventions should be revised
to permit such unions without penalties and without any sense of shame.

they ask public opinion to sanction what contraception has made
feasible. they point out that “a large number of the men and women
of to-day form sexual relationships outside marriage—whether or
not they ultimately lead to marriage—which they conceal or seek to
conceal from the world.” these relationships, says mr. ellis, differ
from the extra-marital manifestations of the sexual life of the past
in that they do not derive from prostitution or seduction. both of
these ancient practices, he adds, are diminishing, for prostitution is
becoming less attractive and, with the education of women, seduction
is becoming less possible. the novelty of these new relations, the
prevalence of which is conceded though it cannot be measured, lies in
the fact that they are entered into voluntarily, have no obvious social
consequences, and are altogether beyond the power of law or opinion to
control. the argument, therefore, is that they should be approved, the
chief point made being that by removing all stigma from such unions,
they will become candid, wholesome, and delightful. the objection of
the reformers to the existing conventions is that the sense of sin
poisons the spontaneous goodness of such relationships. [p298]

the actual proposals go by a great variety of fancy names such as free
love, trial marriage, companionate marriage. when these proposals are
examined it is evident they all take birth control as their major
premise, and then deduce from it some part or all of the logical
consequences. companionate marriage, for example, is from the point
of view of the law, whatever it may be subjectively, nothing but
a somewhat roundabout way of saying that childless couples may be
divorced by mutual consent. it is a proposal, if not to control, then
at least to register, publicly all sexual unions, the theory being that
this public registration will abolish shame and furtiveness and give
them a certain permanence. companionate marriage is frankly an attempt
at a compromise between marriages that are difficult to dissolve and
clandestine relationships which have no sanction whatever.

the uncompromising logic of birth control has been stated more clearly,
i think, by mr. bertrand russell than by anyone else. writing to judge
lindsey during the uproar about companionate marriage, mr. russell said:

  i go further than you do: the things which your enemies say about
  you would be largely true of me. my own view is that the state
  and the law should take no notice of sexual relations apart from
  children, and that no marriage ceremony should be valid unless
  accompanied by a medical certificate of the woman’s pregnancy.
  but when once there are children, i think that divorce should be
  avoided except for very grave cause. i should not regard physical
  infidelity as a very grave cause and should teach people that
  it is to be expected and tolerated, but should not involve the
  begetting of illegitimate children—not because illegitimacy is
  bad in [p299] itself, but because a home with two parents is
  best for children. i do not feel that the main thing in marriage
  is the feeling of the parents for each other; the main thing is
  cooperation in bearing children.

in this admirably clear statement there is set forth a plan for that
complete separation between the primary and secondary function of
sexual intercourse which contraception makes possible.


4. _the use of convention_

it is one thing, however, to recognize the full logic of birth control
and quite another thing to say that convention ought to be determined
by that logic. one might as well argue that because automobiles can be
driven at a hundred miles an hour the laws should sanction driving at
the rate of a hundred miles an hour. birth control is a device like the
automobile, and its inherent possibilities do not fix the best uses to
be made of it.

what an understanding of the logic of birth control does is to set
before us the limits of coercive control of sexual relations. the law
can, for example, make divorce very difficult where there are children.
it could, as mr. bertrand russell suggests, refuse divorce on the
ground of infidelity. on the other hand the law cannot effectively
prohibit infidelity, and as a matter of fact does not do so to-day.
it cannot effectively prohibit fornication though there are statutes
against it. therefore, what mr. russell has done is to describe
accurately enough the actual limits of effective legal control.

but sexual conventions are not statutes, and it is important to define
quite clearly just what they are. in the [p300] older world they were
rules of conduct enforceable by the family and the community through
habit, coercion, and authority. in this sense of the word, convention
tends to lose force and effect in modern civilization. yet a convention
is essentially a theory of conduct and all human conduct implies some
theory of conduct. therefore, although it may be that no convention
is any longer coercive, conventions remain, are adopted, revised, and
debated. they embody the considered results of experience: perhaps the
experience of a lonely pioneer or perhaps the collective experience of
the dominant members of a community. in any event they are as necessary
to a society which recognizes no authority as to one which does. for
the inexperienced must be offered some kind of hypothesis when they
are confronted with the necessity of making choices: they cannot be so
utterly open-minded that they stand inert until something collides with
them. in the modern world, therefore, the function of conventions is to
declare the meaning of experience. a good convention is one which will
most probably show the inexperienced the way to happy experience.

just because the rule of sexual conduct by authority is dissolving,
the need of conventions which will guide conduct is increasing.
that, in fact, is the reason for the immense and urgent discussion
of sex throughout the modern world. it is an attempt to attain an
understanding of the bewilderingly new experiences to which few men or
women know how to adjust themselves. the true business of the moralist
in the midst of all this is not to denounce this and to advocate that,
but to see as clearly as he can into the meaning of it, so that out
of the chaos of [p301] pain and happiness and worry he may help to
deliver a usable insight.

it is, i think, to the separation of parenthood as a vocation from love
as an end in itself that the moralist must address himself. for this is
the heart of the problem: to determine whether this separation, which
birth control has made feasible and which law can no longer prevent, is
in harmony with the conditions of human happiness.


5. _the new hedonism_

among those who hold that the separation of the primary and secondary
functions of the sexual impulse is good and should constitute the major
premise of modern sexual conventions, there are, as i have already
pointed out, two schools of thought. there are the transcendentalists
who believe with mr. havelock ellis that “sexual pleasure, wisely used
and not abused, may prove the stimulus and liberator of our finest and
most exalted activities,” and there are the unpretentious hedonists
who believe that sexual pleasure is pleasure and not the stimulus or
liberator of anything important. both are, as we say, emancipated:
neither recognizes the legitimacy of objective control unless a child
is born, and both reject as an evil the traditional subjective control
exercised by the sense of sin. where they differ is in their valuation
of love.

hedonism as an attitude toward life is, of course, not a new thing in
the world, but it has never before been tested out under such favorable
conditions. to be a successful hedonist a man must have the opportunity
to seek his pleasures without fear of any kind. theodorus of cyrene,
[p302] who taught about 310 b.c., saw that clearly, and therefore
to release men from fear openly denied the olympian gods. but the
newest hedonism has had an even better prospect than the classical:
it finds men emancipated not only of all fear of divine authority
and human custom but of physical and social consequences as well. if
the pursuit of pleasure by carefree men were the way to happiness,
hedonism ought, then, to be proving itself triumphantly in the modern
world. possibly it is too early to judge, but the fact is nevertheless
highly significant, i think, that the new hedonists should already have
arrived at the same conclusion as the later hedonists in the classical
world. hegesias, for example, wrote when hedonism had already had a
great vogue: he was called, rather significantly, the “persuader to
die.” for having started from the premise that pleasure is the end of
life, he concluded that, since life affords at least as much pain as
pleasure, the end of life cannot be realized. there is now a generation
in the world which is approaching middle age. they have exercised the
privileges which were won by the iconoclasts who attacked what was
usually called the puritan or victorian tradition. they have exercised
the privileges without external restraint and without inhibition. their
conclusions are reported in the latest works of fiction. do they report
that they have found happiness in their freedom? well, hardly. instead
of the gladness which they were promised, they seem, like hegesias, to
have found the wasteland.

“if love has come to be less often a sin,” says that very discerning
critic of life and letters, mr. joseph wood krutch, “it has come also
to be less often a supreme privilege. [p303] if one turns to the
smarter of those novelists who describe the doings of the more advanced
set of those who are experimenting with life—to, for example, mr.
aldous huxley or mr. ernest hemingway,—one will discover in their
tragic farces the picture of a society which is at bottom in despair
because, though it is more completely absorbed in the pursuit of love
than in anything else, it has lost the sense of any ultimate importance
inherent in the experience which preoccupies it; and if one turns to
the graver of the intellectual writers,—to, for example, mr. d. h.
lawrence, mr. t. s. eliot, or mr. james joyce,—one will find both
explicitly and implicitly a similar sense that the transcendental value
of love has become somehow attenuated, and that, to take a perfectly
concrete example, a conclusion which does no more than bring a man and
woman into complete possession of one another is a mere bathos which
does nothing except legitimately provoke the comment, ‘well, what of
it?’ one can hardly imagine them concerned with what used to be called,
in a phrase which they have helped to make faintly ridiculous, ‘the
right to love.’ individual freedom they have inherited and assumed
as a right, but they are concerned with something which their more
restricted forefathers assumed—with, that is to say, the value of love
itself. no inhibitions either within or without restrain them, but they
are asking themselves, ‘what is it worth?’ and they are certainly no
longer feeling that it is obviously and in itself something which makes
life worth the living.

“to huxley and hemingway—i take them as the most conspicuous exemplars
of a whole school—love is at times only a sort of obscene joke. the
former in particular has [p304] delighted to mock sentiment with
physiology, to place the emotions of the lover in comic juxtaposition
with quaint biological lore, and to picture a romantic pair ‘quietly
sweating palm to palm.’ but the joke is one which turns quickly bitter
upon the tongue, for a great and gratifying illusion has passed away,
leaving the need for it still there. his characters still feel the
psychological urge, and, since they have no sense of sin in connection
with it, they yield easily and continually to that urge; but they
have also the human need to respect their chief preoccupation, and
it is the capacity to do this that they have lost. absorbed in the
pursuit of sexual satisfaction, they never find love and they are
scarcely aware that they are seeking it, but they are far from content
with themselves. in a generally devaluated world they are eagerly
endeavoring to get what they can in the pursuit of satisfactions which
are sufficiently instinctive to retain inevitably a modicum of animal
pleasure, but they cannot transmute that simple animal pleasure into
anything else. they themselves not infrequently share the contempt with
which their creator regards them, and nothing could be less seductive,
because nothing could be less glamorous, than the description of the
debaucheries born of nothing except a sense of the emptiness of life.”

this “generally devaluated world,” of which mr. krutch speaks, what
is it after all, but a world in which nothing connects itself very
much with anything else? if you start with the belief that love is
the pleasure of a moment, is it really surprising that it yields only
a momentary pleasure? for it is the most ironical of all illusions
to suppose that one is free of illusions in contracting any [p305]
human desire to its primary physiological satisfaction. does a man
dine well because he ingests the requisite number of calories? is he
freer from illusions about his appetite than the man who creates an
interesting dinner party out of the underlying fact that his guests and
he have the need to fill their stomachs? would it really be a mark of
enlightenment if each of them filled his stomach in the solitary and
solemn conviction that good conversation and pleasant companionship are
one thing and nutrition is another?

this much the transcendentalists understand well enough. they do
not wish to isolate the satisfaction of desire from our “finest
and most exalted activities.” they would make it “the stimulus and
the liberator” of these activities. they would use it to arouse to
“wholesome activity all the complex and interrelated systems of the
organism.” but what are these finest and most exalted activities which
are to be stimulated and liberated? the discovery of truth, the making
of works of art, meditation and insight? mr. ellis does not specify. if
these are the activities that are meant, then the discussion applies to
a very few of the men and women on earth. for the activities of most
of them are necessarily concerned with earning a living and managing
a household and rearing children and finding recreation. if the art
of love is to stimulate and liberate activities, it is these prosaic
activities which it must stimulate and liberate. but if you idealize
the logic of birth control, make parenthood a separate vocation,
isolate love from work and the hard realities of living, and say that
it must be spontaneous and carefree, what have you done? you have
separated [p306] it from all the important activities which it might
stimulate and liberate. you have made love spontaneous but empty, and
you have made home-building and parenthood efficient, responsible, and
dull.

what has happened, i believe, is what so often happens in the first
enthusiasm for a revolutionary invention. its possibilities are so
dazzling that men forget that inventions belong to man and not man to
his inventions. in the discussion which has ensued since birth control
became generally feasible, the central confusion has been that the
reformers have tried to fix their sexual ideals in accordance with the
logic of birth control instead of the logic of human nature. birth
control does make feasible this dissociation of interests which were
once organically united. there are undoubtedly the best of reasons
for dissociating them up to a point. but how completely it is wise
to dissociate them is a matter to be determined not by saying how
completely it is possible to dissociate them, but how much it is
desirable to dissociate them.

all the varieties of the modern doctrine that man is a collection of
separate impulses, each of which can attain its private satisfaction,
are in fundamental contradiction not only with the traditional body of
human wisdom but with the modern conception of the human character.
thus in one breath it is said in advanced circles that love is a series
of casual episodes, and in the next it transpires that the speaker is
in process of having himself elaborately psychoanalyzed in order to
disengage his soul from the effects of apparently trivial episodes
in his childhood. on the one hand it is asserted that sex pervades
everything and on the other that sexual behavior is inconsequential.
[p307] it is taught that experience is cumulative, that we are what
our past has made us and shall be what we are making of ourselves now,
and then with bland indifference to the significance of this we are
told that all experiences are free, equal, and independent.


6. _marriage and affinity_

it is not hard to see why those who are concerned in revising sexual
conventions should have taken the logic of birth control rather than
knowledge of human nature as their major premise. birth control is an
immensely beneficent invention which can and does relieve men and women
of some of the most tragic sorrows which afflict them: the tragedies of
the unwanted child, the tragedies of insupportable economic burdens,
the tragedies of excessive child bearing and the destruction of youth
and the necessity of living in an unrelenting series of pregnancies. it
offers them freedom from intolerable mismating, from sterile virtue,
from withering denials of happiness. these are the facts which the
reformers saw, and in birth control they saw the instrument by which
such freedom could be obtained.

the sexual conventions which they have proposed are really designed to
cure notorious evils. they do not define the good life in sex; they
point out ways of escape from the bad life. thus companionate marriage
is proposed by judge lindsey not as a type of union which is inherently
desirable, but as an avenue of escape from corrupt marriages on the
one hand and furtive promiscuity on the other. the movement for free
divorce comes down to this: it is necessary because so many marriages
[p308] are a failure. the whole theory that love is separate from
parenthood and home-building is supported by the evidence in those
cases where married couples are not lovers. it is the pathology of
sexual relations which inspires the reformers of sexual conventions.

there is no need to quarrel with them because they insist upon remedies
for manifest evils. deep confusion results when they forget that these
remedies are only remedies, and go on to institute them as ideals.
it is better, without any doubt, that incompatible couples should
be divorced and that each should then be free to find a mate who is
compatible. but the frequency with which men and women have to resort
to divorce because they are incompatible will be greatly influenced by
the notions they have before and during marriage of what compatibility
is, and what it involves. the remedies for failure are important. but
what is central is the conception of sexual relations by which they
expect to live successfully.

they cannot—i am, of course, speaking broadly—expect to live
successfully by the conception that the primary and secondary functions
of sex are in separate compartments of the soul. i have indicated
why this conception is self-defeating and why, since human nature is
organic and experience cumulative, our activities must, so to speak,
engage and imply each other. mates who are not lovers will not really
cooperate, as mr. bertrand russell thinks they should, in bearing
children; they will be distracted, insufficient, and worst of all they
will be merely dutiful. lovers who have nothing to do but love each
other are not really to be envied; love and nothing else very soon is
nothing else. the emotion of love, in spite [p309] of the romantics,
is not self-sustaining; it endures only when the lovers love many
things together, and not merely each other. it is this understanding
that love cannot successfully be isolated from the business of living
which is the enduring wisdom of the institution of marriage. let the
law be what it may be as to what constitutes a marriage contract and
how and when it may be dissolved. let public opinion be as tolerant
as it can be toward any and every kind of irregular and experimental
relationship. when all the criticisms have been made, when all
supernatural sanctions have been discarded, all subjective inhibitions
erased, all compulsions abolished, the convention of marriage still
remains to be considered as an interpretation of human experience. it
is by the test of how genuinely it interprets human experience that the
convention of marriage will ultimately be judged.

the wisdom of marriage rests upon an extremely unsentimental view of
lovers and their passions. its assumptions, when they are frankly
exposed, are horrifying to those who have been brought up in the
popular romantic tradition of the nineteenth century. these assumptions
are that, given an initial attraction, a common social background,
common responsibilities, and the conviction that the relationship is
permanent, compatibility in marriage can normally be achieved. it is
precisely this that the prevailing sentimentality about love denies.
it assumes that marriages are made in heaven, that compatibility is
instinctive, a mere coincidence, that happy unions are, in the last
analysis, lucky accidents in which two people who happen to suit
each other happen to have met. the convention of marriage rests on
an interpretation of [p310] human nature which does not confuse the
subjective feeling of the lovers that their passion is unique, with
the brutal but objective fact that, had they never met, each of them
would in all probability have found a lover who was just as unique.
“love,” says mr. santayana, “is indeed much less exacting than it
thinks itself. nine-tenths of its cause are in the lover, for one-tenth
that may be in the object. were the latter not accidentally at hand,
an almost identical passion would probably have been felt for some one
else; for, although with acquaintance the quality of an attachment
naturally adapts itself to the person loved, and makes that person
its standard and ideal, the first assault and mysterious glow of the
passion is much the same for every object.”

this is the reason why the popular conception of romantic love as the
meeting of two affinities produces so much unhappiness. the mysterious
glow of passion is accepted as a sign that the great coincidence has
occurred; there is a wedding and soon, as the glow of passion cools, it
is discovered that no instinctive and preordained affinity is present.
at this point the wisdom of popular romantic marriage is exhausted. for
it proceeds on the assumption that love is a mysterious visitation.
there is nothing left, then, but to grin and bear a miserably dull and
nagging fate, or to break off and try again. the deep fallacy of the
conception is in the failure to realize that compatibility is a process
and not an accident, that it depends upon the maturing of instinctive
desire by adaptation to the whole nature of the other person and to the
common concerns of the pair of lovers.

the romantic theory of affinities rests upon an immature [p311] theory
of desire. it springs from an infantile belief that the success of
love is in the satisfactions which the other person provides. what
this really means is that in childlike fashion the lover expects
his mistress to supply him with happiness. but in the adult world
that expectation is false. because nine-tenths of the cause, as mr.
santayana says, are in the lover for one-tenth that may be in the
object, it is what the lover does about that nine-tenths which is
decisive for his happiness. it is the claim, therefore, of those
who uphold the ideal of marriage as a full partnership, and reject
the ideal which would separate love as an art from parenthood as a
vocation, that in the home made by a couple who propose to see it
through, there are provided the essential conditions under which
the passions of men and women are most likely to become mature, and
therefore harmonious and disinterested.


7. _the schooling of desire_

they need not deny, indeed it would be foolish as well as cruel for
them to underestimate, the enormous difficulty of achieving successful
marriages under modern conditions. for with the dissolution of
authority and compulsion, a successful marriage depends wholly upon the
capacity of the man and the woman to make it successful. they have to
accomplish wholly by understanding and sympathy and disinterestedness
of purpose what was once in a very large measure achieved by habit,
necessity, and the absence of any practicable alternative. it takes
two persons to make a successful marriage in the modern world, and
that fact more than doubles its difficulty. for these reasons alone
the modern state ought to do what it [p312] would none the less be
compelled to do: it ought to provide decent ways of retreat in case of
failure.

but if it is the truth that the convention of marriage correctly
interprets human experience, whereas the separatist conventions are
self-defeating, then the convention of marriage will prove to be the
conclusion which emerges out of all this immense experimenting. it
will survive not as a rule of law imposed by force, for that is now, i
think, become impossible. it will not survive as a moral commandment
with which the elderly can threaten the young. they will not listen.
it will survive as the dominant insight into the reality of love and
happiness, or it will not survive at all. that does not mean that all
persons will live under the convention of marriage. as a matter of fact
in civilized ages all persons never have. it means that the convention
of marriage, when it is clarified by insight into reality, is likely
to be the hypothesis upon which men and women will ordinarily proceed.
there will be no compulsion behind it except the compulsion in each man
and woman to reach a true adjustment of his life.

it is in this necessity of clarifying their love for those who are
closest to them that the moral problems of the new age come to a
personal issue. it is in the realm of sexual relations that mankind is
being schooled amidst pain and worry for the novel conditions which
modernity imposes. it is there, rather than in politics, business, or
even in religion, that the issues are urgent, vivid, and inescapable.
it is there that they touch most poignantly and most radically the
organic roots of human personality. and it is there, in the ordering of
their personal attachments, [p313] that for most men the process of
salvation must necessarily begin.

for disinterestedness in all things, as dean inge says, is a mountain
track which the many are likely in the future as in the past to find
cold, bleak, and bare: that is why “the road of ascent is by personal
affection for man.” by the happy ordering of their personal affections
they may establish the type and the quality and the direction of their
desires for all things. it is in the hidden issues between lovers,
more than anywhere else, that modern men and women are compelled, by
personal anguish rather than by laws and preachments or even by the
persuasions of abstract philosophy, to transcend naive desire and to
reach out towards a mature and disinterested partnership with their
world.




chapter xv [p314]

the moralist in an unbelieving world


1. _the declaration of ideals_

of all the bewilderments of the present age none is greater than that
of the conscientious and candid moralist himself. the very name of
moralist seems to have become a term of disparagement and to suggest
a somewhat pretentious and a somewhat stupid, perhaps even a somewhat
hypocritical, meddler in other men’s lives. in the minds of very many
in the modern generation moralists are set down as persons who, in the
words of dean inge, fancy themselves attracted by god when they are
really only repelled by man.

the disesteem into which moralists have fallen is an historical
accident. it so happens that those who administered the affairs of the
established churches have, by and large, failed utterly to comprehend
how deep and how inexorable was the dissolution of the ancestral order.
they imagined either that this change in human affairs was a kind of
temporary corruption, or that, like the eighty propositions listed in
the syllabus of pope pius ix, it could be regarded as due to “errors”
of the human mind. there were, of course, churchmen who knew better,
but on the whole those who prevailed in the great ecclesiastical
[p315] establishments could not believe that the skepticism of mind
and the freedom of action which modern men exercise were due to
inexorable historic causes. they declined to acknowledge that modern
freedom was not merely a wilful iconoclasm, but the liquidation of an
older order of human life.

because they could not comprehend the magnitude of the revolution in
which they were involved, they set themselves the task of impeding its
progress by chastising the rebels and refuting their rationalizations.
this was described as a vindication of morals. the effect was to
associate morality with the vindication of the habits and dispositions
of those who were most thoroughly out of sympathy with the genuine
needs of modern men.

the difficulties of the new age were much more urgent than those which
the orthodox moralists were concerned with. the moralists insisted
that conduct must conform to the established code; what really worried
men was how to adjust their conduct to the novel circumstances which
confronted them. when they discovered that those who professed to be
moralists were continuing to deny that the novelty of modern things had
any bearing upon human conduct, and that morality was a word signifying
a return to usages which it was impossible to follow, even if it were
desirable, there was a kind of tacit agreement to let the moralists be
moral and to find other language in which to describe the difference
between good and bad, right and wrong. mr. joad is not unrepresentative
of this reaction into contempt when he speaks of “the dowagers, the
aunts, the old maids, the parsons, the town councillors, the clerks,
the members of vigilance committees and purity [p316] leagues, all
those who are themselves too old to enjoy sex, too unattractive to
obtain what they would wish to enjoy, or too respectable to prefer
enjoyment to respectability.” thus for many the name of moralist came
to be very nearly synonymous with antipathy to the genius and the
vitality of the modern age.

but it is idle for moralists to ascribe the decline of their influence
to the perversity of their fellow creatures. the phenomenon is
world-wide. moreover, it is most intensely present at precisely those
points where the effect of science and the machine technology have
been most thoroughly manifested. the moralists are not confronted
with a scandal but with history. they have to come to terms with a
process in the life of mankind which is working upon the inner springs
of being and altering inevitably the premises of conduct. they need
not suppose that their pews are empty and that their exhortations are
ignored because modern men are really as wilful as the manners of the
younger generation lead them to conclude. much of what appears to be a
tough self-sufficiency is protective: it is a brittle crust covering
depths of uncertainty. if the advice of moralists is ignored, it is
not because this generation is too proud to listen, or unaware that
it has anything to learn. on the contrary there is such curiosity and
questioning as never before engaged so large a number of men. the
audience to which a genuine moralist might speak is there. if it is
inattentive when the orthodox moralist speaks, it is because he seems
to speak irrelevantly.

the trouble with the moralists is in the moralists themselves: they
have failed to understand their times. they [p317] think they are
dealing with a generation that refuses to believe in ancient authority.
they are, in fact, dealing with a generation that cannot believe in
it. they think they are confronted with men who have an irrational
preference for immorality, whereas the men and women about them are
ridden by doubts because they do not know what they prefer, nor why.
the moralists fancy that they are standing upon the rock of eternal
truth, surveying the chaos about them. they are greatly mistaken.
nothing in the modern world is more chaotic—not its politics, its
business, or its sexual relations—than the minds of orthodox moralists
who suppose that the problem of morals is somehow to find a way of
reinforcing the sanctions which are dissolving. how can we, they say in
effect, find formulas and rhetoric potent enough to make men behave?
how can we revive in them that love and fear of god, that sense of the
creature’s dependence upon his creator, that obedience to the commands
of a heavenly king, which once gave force and effect to the moral code?

they have misconceived the moral problem, and therefore they
misconceive the function of the moralist. an authoritative code of
morals has force and effect when it expresses the settled customs of
a stable society: the pharisee can impose upon the minority only such
conventions as the majority find appropriate and necessary. but when
customs are unsettled, as they are in the modern world, by continual
change in the circumstances of life, the pharisee is helpless. he
cannot command with authority because his commands no longer imply the
usages of the community: they express the prejudices of the moralist
rather than the practices of men. when that [p318] happens, it is
presumptuous to issue moral commandments, for in fact nobody has
authority to command. it is useless to command when nobody has the
disposition to obey. it is futile when nobody really knows exactly
what to command. in such societies, wherever they have appeared among
civilized men, the moralist has ceased to be an administrator of usages
and has had to become an interpreter of human needs. for ages when
custom is unsettled are necessarily ages of prophecy. the moralist
cannot teach what is revealed; he must reveal what can be taught. he
has to seek insight rather than to preach.

the disesteem into which moralists have fallen is due at bottom to
their failure to see that in an age like this one the function of the
moralist is not to exhort men to be good but to elucidate what the
good is. the problem of sanctions is secondary. for sanctions cannot
be artificially constructed: they are a product of agreement and
usage. where no agreement exists, where no usages are established,
where ideals are not clarified and where conventions are not
followed comfortably by the mass of men, there are not, and cannot
be, sanctions. it is possible to command where most men are already
obedient. but even the greatest general cannot discipline a whole army
at once. it is only when the greater part of his army is with him that
he can quell the mutiny of a faction.

the acids of modernity are dissolving the usages and the sanctions to
which men once habitually conformed. it is therefore impossible for the
moralist to command. he can only persuade. to persuade he must show
that the course of conduct he advocates is not an arbitrary pattern
[p319] to which vitality must submit, but that which vitality itself
would choose if it were clearly understood. he must be able to show
that goodness is victorious vitality and badness defeated vitality;
that sin is the denial and virtue the fulfilment of the promise
inherent in the purposes of men. the good, said the greek moralist, is
“that which all things aim at”; we may perhaps take this to mean that
the good is that which men would wish to do if they knew what they were
doing.

if the morality of the naive hedonist who blindly seeks the
gratification of his instincts is irrational in that he trusts immature
desire, disregards intelligence and damns the consequences, the
morality of the pharisee is no less irrational. it reduces itself to
the wholly arbitrary proposition that the best life for man would be
some other kind of life than that which satisfies his nature. the true
function of the moralist in an age when usage is unsettled is what
aristotle who lived in such an age described it to be: to promote good
conduct by discovering and explaining the mark at which things aim. the
moralist is irrelevant, if not meddlesome and dangerous, unless in his
teaching he strives to give a true account, imaginatively conceived,
of that which experience would show is desirable among the choices
that are possible and necessary. if he is to be listened to, and if
he is to deserve a hearing among his fellows, he must set himself
this task which is so much humbler than to command and so much more
difficult than to exhort: he must seek to anticipate and to supplement
the insight of his fellow men into the problems of their adjustment to
reality. he must find ways to make clear and ordered and expressive
those concerns [p320] which are latent but overlaid and confused by
their preoccupations and misunderstandings.

could he do that with perfect lucidity he would not need to summon the
police nor evoke the fear of hell: hell would be what it really is,
and what in all inspired moralities it has always been understood to
be, the very quality of evil itself. nor would he find himself in the
absurd predicament of seeming to argue that virtue is highly desirable
but intensely unpleasant. it would not be necessary to praise goodness,
for it would be that which men most ardently desired. were the nature
of good and evil really made plain by moralists, their teachings would
appear to the modern listener not like exhortations from without, but
as keats said of poetry: “a wording of his own highest thoughts and ...
almost a remembrance.”


2. _the choice of a way_

what modernity requires of the moralist is that he should see with an
innocent eye how men must reform their wants in a world which is not
concerned to make them happy. the problem, as i have tried to show, is
not a new one. it has been faced and solved by the masters of wisdom.
what is new is the scale on which the problem is presented—in that so
many must face it now—and its radical character in that the organic
bonds of custom and belief are dissolving. there ensues a continual
necessity of adjusting their lives to complex novelty. in such a
world simple customs are unsuitable and authoritative commandments
incredible. no prescription can now be written which men can naively
and obediently follow. they have, therefore, to reeducate their
[p321] wants by an understanding of their own relation to a world
which is unconcerned with their hopes and fears. from the moralists
they can get only hypotheses—distillations of experience carefully
examined—probabilities, that is to say, upon which they may begin to
act, but which they themselves must constantly correct by their own
insight.

it is difficult for the orthodox moralists to believe that amidst the
ruins of authority men will ever learn to do this. they can point to
the urban crowds and ask whether anyone supposes that such persons are
capable of ordering their lives by so subtle an instrument as the human
understanding. they can insist with unanswerable force that this is
absurd: that the great mass of men must be guided by rules and moved
by the symbols of hope and fear. and they can ask what there is in
the conception of the moralist as i have outlined it which takes the
character of the populace into account.

what i take into account first of all is the fact, which it seems to
me is indisputable, that for the modern populace the old rules are
becoming progressively unsuitable and the old symbols of hope and fear
progressively unreal. i ascribe that to the inherent character of the
modern ways of living. i conclude from this that if the populace must
be led, if it must have easily comprehended rules, if it must have
common symbols of hope and fear, the question is how are its leaders
to be developed, rules to be worked out, symbols created. the ultimate
question is not how the populace is to be ruled, but what the teachers
are to think. that is the question that has to be settled first: it is
the preface to everything else.

for while moralists are at sixes and sevens in their own [p322]
souls, not much can be done about morality, however high or low may
be our estimates of the popular intelligence and character. if it
were necessary to assume that ideals are relevant only if they are
universally attainable, it would be a waste of time to discuss them.
for it is evident enough that many, if not most men, must fail to
comprehend what modern morality implies. but to recognize this is not
to prophesy that the world is doomed unless men perform the miracle
of reverting to their ancestral tradition. this is not the first time
in the history of mankind when a revolution in the affairs of men
has produced chaos in the human spirit. the world can endure a good
deal of chaos. it always has. the ideal inherent in any age is never
realized completely: greece, which we like to idealize as an oasis of
rationality, was only in some respects hellenic; the ages of faith
were only somewhat christian. the processes of nature and of society
go on somehow none the less. men are born and they live and die with
some happiness and some sorrow though they neither envisage wholly nor
nearly approximate the ideals they pursue.

but if civilization is to be coherent and confident it must be _known_
in that civilization what its ideals are. there must exist in the form
of clearly available ideas an understanding of what the fulfilment of
the promise of that civilization might mean, an imaginative conception
of the good at which it might, and, if it is to flourish, at which
it must aim. that knowledge, though no one has it perfectly, and
though relatively few have it at all, is the principle of all order
and certainty in the life of that people. by it they can clarify the
practical conduct [p323] of life in some measure, and add immeasurably
to its dignity.

to elucidate the ideals with which the modern world is pregnant is
the original business of the moralist. insofar as he succeeds in
disentangling that which men think they believe from that which
it is appropriate for them to believe, he is opening his mind to
a true vision of the good life. the vision itself we can discern,
only faintly, for we have as yet only the occasional and fragmentary
testimony of sages and saints and heroes, dim anticipations here and
there, a most imperfect science of human behavior, and our own obscure
endeavor to make explicit and rational the stresses of the modern
world within our own souls. but we can begin to see, i think, that the
evidence converges upon the theory that what the sages have prophesied
as high religion, what psychologists delineate as matured personality,
and the disinterestedness which the great society requires for its
practical fulfilment, are all of a piece, and are the basic elements of
a modern morality. i think the truth lies in this theory.

if it does, experience will enrich and refine it, and what is now an
abstract principle arrived at by intuition and dialectic will engender
ideas that marshal, illuminate, and anticipate the subtle and intricate
detail of our actual experience. that at least can be our belief. in
the meantime, the modern moralist cannot expect soon to construct a
systematic and harmonious moral edifice like that which st. thomas
aquinas and dante constructed to house the aspirations of the mediæval
world. he is in a much earlier phase in the evolution of his world,
in the phase of inquiry and prophecy rather than of ordering and
harmonizing, [p324] and he is under the necessity of remaining close
to the elements of experience in order to apprehend them freshly.
he cannot, therefore, permit the old symbols of faith and the old
formulations of right and wrong to prejudice his insight. insofar as
they contain wisdom for him or can become its vehicles, he will return
to them. but he cannot return to them with honor or with sincerity
until he has himself gone and drunk deeply at the sources of experience
from which they originated.

only when he has done that can he again in any honest sense take
possession of the wisdom which he inherits. it requires wisdom to
understand wisdom; the music is nothing if the audience is deaf.
in the great moral systems and the great religions of mankind are
embedded the record of how men have dealt with destiny, and only the
thoughtless will argue that that record is obsolete and insignificant.
but it is overlaid with much that is obsolete and for that reason it
is undeciphered and inexpressive. the wisdom it contains has to be
discovered anew before the old symbols will yield up their meaning.
that is the only way in which bacon’s aphorism can be fulfilled,
that “a little philosophy inclineth man’s mind to atheism, but depth
in philosophy bringeth men’s minds about to religion.” the depth
in philosophy which can bring them about is a much deeper and more
poignant experience than complacent churchmen suppose.

it can be no mere settling back into that from which men in the ardor
of their youth escaped. this man and that may settle back, to be sure;
he may cease to inquire though his questions are unanswered. but such
conformity is sterile, and due to mere weariness of mind and [p325]
body. the inquiry goes on because it has to go on, and while the
vitality of our race is unimpaired, there will be men who feel with mr.
whitehead that “to acquiesce in discrepancy is destructive of candor
and of moral cleanliness,” and that “it belongs to the self-respect of
intellect to pursue every tangle of thought to its final unravelment.”
the crisis in the religious loyalties of mankind cannot be resolved by
weariness and good nature, or by the invention of little intellectual
devices for straightening out the dilemmas of biology and genesis,
history and the gospels with which so many churchmen busy themselves.
beneath these little conflicts there is a real dilemma which modern men
cannot successfully evade. “where is the way where light dwelleth?”
they are compelled to choose consciously, clearly, and with full
realization of what the choice implies, between religion as a system of
cosmic government and religion as insight into a cleansed and matured
personality: between god conceived as the master of that fate, creator,
providence, and king, and god conceived as the highest good at which
they might aim. for god is the supreme symbol in which man expresses
his destiny, and if that symbol is confused, his life is confused.

men have not, hitherto, had to make that choice, for the historic
churches have sheltered both kinds of religious experience, and the
same mysteries have been the symbols of both. that confusion is no
longer benign because men are no longer unconscious of it. they are
aware that it is a confusion, and they are stultified by it. because
the popular religion of supernatural governments is undermined, the
symbols of religion do not provide clear channels [p326] for religious
experience. they are choked with the debris of dead notions in which
men are unable to believe and unwilling to disbelieve. the result is a
frustration in the inner life which will persist as long as the leaders
of thought speak of god in more senses than one, and thus render all
faith invalid, insincere, and faltering.


3. _the religion of the spirit_

the choice is at last a personal one. the decision is rendered not by
argument but by feeling. those who believe that their salvation lies
in obedience to, and communion with, the king of creation can know how
whole-hearted their faith is by the confidence of their own hearts. if
they are at peace, they need inquire no further. there are, however,
those who do not find a principle of order in the belief that they are
related to a supernatural power. they cannot be argued into the ancient
belief, for it has been dissolved by the circumstances of their lives.
they are deeply perplexed. they have learned that the absence of belief
is vacancy; they know, from disillusionment and anxiety, that there is
no freedom in mere freedom. they must find, then, some other principle
which will give coherence and direction to their lives.

if the argument in these pages is sound, they need not look for and,
in fact, cannot hope for, some new and unexpected revelation. since
they are unable to find a principle of order in the authority of a
will outside themselves, there is no place they can find it except
in an ideal of the human personality. but they do not have to invent
such an ideal out of hand. the ideal way of life for men who must make
their own terms with experience and find [p327] their own happiness
has been stated again and again. it is that only the regenerate, the
disinterested, the mature, can make use of freedom. this is the central
insight of the teachers of wisdom. we can see now, i think, that it
is also the mark at which the modern study of human nature points. we
can see, too, that it is the pattern of successful conduct in the most
advanced phases of the development of modern civilization. the ideal,
then, is an old one, but its confirmation and its practical pertinence
are new. the world is able at last to take seriously what its greatest
teachers have said. and since all things need a name, if they are to be
talked about, devotion to this ideal may properly be called by the name
which these greatest teachers gave it; it may be called the religion
of the spirit. at the heart of it is the knowledge that the goal of
human effort is to be able, in the words i have so often quoted from
confucius, to follow what the heart desires without transgressing what
is right.

in an age when custom is dissolved and authority is broken, the
religion of the spirit is not merely a possible way of life. in
principle it is the only way which transcends the difficulties. it
alone is perfectly neutral about the constitution of the universe, in
that it has no expectation that the universe will justify naive desire.
therefore, the progress of science cannot upset it. its indifference to
what the facts may be is indeed the very spirit of scientific inquiry.
a religion which rests upon particular conclusions in astronomy,
biology, and history may be fatally injured by the discovery of new
truths. but the religion of the spirit does not depend upon creeds and
cosmologies; it has no vested interest in any particular truth. it is
[p328] concerned not with the organization of matter, but with the
quality of human desire.

it alone can endure the variety and complexity of things, for the
religion of the spirit has no thesis to defend. it seeks excellence
wherever it may appear, and finds it in anything which is inwardly
understood; its motive is not acquisition but sympathy. whatever is
completely understood with sympathy for its own logic and purposes
ceases to be external and stubborn and is wholly tamed. to understand
is not only to pardon, but in the end to love. there is no itch in
the religion of the spirit to make men good by bearing down upon them
with righteousness and making them conform to a pattern. its social
principle is to live and let live. it has the only tolerable code of
manners for a society in which men and women have become freely-moving
individuals, no longer held in the grooves of custom by their ancestral
ways. it is the only disposition of the soul which meets the moral
difficulties of an anarchical age, for its principle is to civilize the
passions, not by regulating them imperiously, but by transforming them
with a mature understanding of their place in an adult environment.
it is the only possible hygiene of the soul for men whose selves have
become disjointed by the loss of their central certainties, because
it counsels them to draw the sting of possessiveness out of their
passions, and thus by removing anxiety to render them harmonious and
serene.

the philosophy of the spirit is an almost exact reversal of the
worldling’s philosophy. the ordinary man believes that he will be
blessed if he is virtuous, and therefore virtue seems to him a price
he pays now for a blessedness he [p329] will some day enjoy. while
he is waiting for his reward, therefore, virtue seems to him drab,
arbitrary, and meaningless. for the reward is deferred, and there is
really no instant proof that virtue really leads to the happiness he
has been promised. because the reward is deferred, it too becomes
vague and dubious, for that which we never experience, we cannot truly
understand. in the realm of the spirit, blessedness is not deferred:
there is no future which is more auspicious than the present; there
are no compensations later for evils now. evil is to be overcome now
and happiness is to be achieved now, for the kingdom of god is within
you. the life of the spirit is not a commercial transaction in which
the profit has to be anticipated; it is a kind of experience which is
inherently profitable.

and so the mature man would take the world as it comes, and within
himself remain quite unperturbed. when he acted, he would know that he
was only testing an hypothesis, and if he failed, he would know that he
had made a mistake. he would be quite prepared for the discovery that
he might make mistakes, for his intelligence would be disentangled from
his hopes. the failure of his experiment could not, therefore, involve
the failure of his life. for the aspect of life which implicated his
soul would be his understanding of life, and, to the understanding,
defeat is no less interesting than victory. it would be no effort,
therefore, for him to be tolerant, and no annoyance to be skeptical.
he would face pain with fortitude, for he would have put it away
from the inner chambers of his soul. fear would not haunt him, for
he would be without compulsion to seize anything and without anxiety
[p330] as to its fate. he would be strong, not with the strength of
hard resolves, but because he was free of that tension which vain
expectations beget. would his life be uninteresting because he was
disinterested? he would have the whole universe, rather than the prison
of his own hopes and fears, for his habitation, and in imagination all
possible forms of being. how could that be dull unless he brought the
dullness with him? he might dwell with all beauty and all knowledge,
and they are inexhaustible. would he, then, dream idle dreams? only if
he chose to. for he might go quite simply about the business of the
world, a good deal more effectively perhaps than the worldling, in
that he did not place an absolute value upon it, and deceive himself.
would he be hopeful? not if to be hopeful was to expect the world to
submit rather soon to his vanity. would he be hopeless? hope is an
expectation of favors to come, and he would take his delights here and
now. since nothing gnawed at his vitals, neither doubt nor ambition,
nor frustration, nor fear, he would move easily through life. and so
whether he saw the thing as comedy, or high tragedy, or plain farce, he
would affirm that it is what it is, and that the wise man can enjoy it.




appendix [p331]

acknowledgments


at the suggestion of the publishers, the references which follow have
been segregated in an appendix instead of being scattered as footnotes
through the text. they felt, rightly enough, i think, that in a book of
this character the purpose of the notes was to acknowledge indebtedness
for the material cited rather than to support the argument, and
that the reader would prefer not to have the text encumbered by the
apparatus of a kind of scholarship to which the author makes no
pretensions.

while these notes, except in a few instances, refer only to matter
actually used in the text, they are also an approximate bibliography
of the works which i have consulted. i wish i could adequately
acknowledge the obligation i owe to my teachers, william james, george
santayana, and graham wallas, though that perhaps is self-evident. i
should like to thank miss jane mather and miss orrie lashin for help
in the preparation of the manuscript. i am under special obligation
to my wife, faye lippmann, without whose assistance i could not have
completed the book.

                                                               w. l.

new york city, january, 1929.




                              notes [p332]

[transcriber’s note: a standard page of this book had 31 or 32 lines.]


page line

   4 32 quoted in irving babbitt, _rousseau and romanticism_, p. 181.

   5  4 john herman randall jr., _the making of the modern mind_,
          p. 118.

   5 21 from _the city of dreadful night_, cited, babbitt, op.
          cit., p. 332.

   5 24 for discussion of this theme, cf. babbitt, op. cit.
          passim.

   5 29 shelley, _prometheus unbound_, act iii, scene iv.

   6 12 from byron, _the island_, cited, babbitt, op. cit., p. 186.

   6 16 from t. h. huxley, _address on university education_,
          delivered, 1876, at the formal opening of johns hopkins
          university. i am indebted to mr. henry hazlitt for the
          quotation.

   7 11 cited, babbitt, op. cit., p. 341.

   7 20 nietzsche, _thus spake zarathustra_, lxix, cited,
          babbitt, op. cit., p. 261.

  11 12 cf. w. r. inge, _the platonic tradition in english
          religious thought_.

  11 19 w. c. greene, introduction to selection from the
          _dialogues of plato_, p. xxiv.

  13 27 calvin, _institutes_, book iv, chapter x, paragraph 7,
          cited a. c. m’giffert, _protestant thought before kant_, p.
          90.

  21 32 harry emerson fosdick, _adventurous religion_, p. 59.

  24  8 w. c. brownell, scribner’s magazine, vol. xxx, p. 112,
          cited in footnote, william james, _the varieties of
          religious experience_, p. 115.

  24 25 william james, _the varieties of religious experience_,
          p. 518.

  25 12 james, op. cit., p. 519.

  26  7 alfred north whitehead, _science and the modern world_,
          pp. 249–250.

  27 12 bertrand russell, _a free man’s worship_, in _mysticism
          and logic_, p. 54.

  27 27 kirsopp lake, _the religion of yesterday and tomorrow_.

  30  2 w. r. inge, _science, religion and reality_, p. 388. [p333]

  31  3 cf. w. b. riley, _the faith of the fundamentalists_,
          times current history, june, 1927.

  34 18 _fundamentalism and the faith_, commonweal, aug. 19,
          1925.

  35 25 george santayana, _reason in religion_, p. 97.

  37 22 the material in this section is taken from harry emerson
          fosdick, _the modern use of the bible_.

  40  2 fosdick, op. cit., p. 83.

  42  5 fosdick, _the desire for immortality_, in _adventurous
          religion_.

  44 10 w. r. inge, _the philosophy of plotinus_, vol. ii, p. 166.

  44 23 w. r. inge, _the platonic tradition in english religious
          thought_.

  47 30 fosdick, _the modern use of the bible_.

  51 22 cf. rudolf otto, _chrysostom on the inconceivable in
          god_, in _the idea of the holy_. appendix i; cf. also
          the _catholic encyclopedia_, vol. viii, p. 452; cf. also
          william james, _the varieties of religious experience_,
          lecture iii.

  56 21 lord acton, inaugural _lecture on the study of history_,
          in _lectures on modern history_.

  70 29 otto gierke, _political theories of the middle ages_—
          translated by f. w. maitland, p. 7.

  71 14 from the song of roland, cited, henry adams,
          _mont-saint-michel and chartres_, p. 29.

  72 18 for an analysis of the texts on which this claim was
          based, cf. james t. shotwell and louise ropes loomis, _the
          see of peter_.

  73 18 cited in a. c. m’giffert, _protestant thought before
          kant_, p. 44.

  74  7 for a comprehensive condemnation by the holy see of
          modern opinions which undermine the authority of the roman
          catholic church, see the syllabus of pius ix (1864) and
          the syllabus of pius x (1907). the syllabus of 1864 lists
          and condemns eighty principal errors of our time, and
          is described by the catholic encyclopedia (vol. xiv, p.
          369) as opposition “to the high tide of that intellectual
          movement of the nineteenth century which strove to sweep
          away the foundations of all human and divine order.”
          the syllabus of 1907 condemns sixty-five propositions
          of the modernists which would “destroy the foundations
          of all natural and supernatural knowledge.” (catholic
          encyclopedia, vol. xiv, [p334] p. 370.) it should be noted
          that there is difference of opinion among catholic scholars
          as to the binding power of these two pronouncements, and
          also that their meaning is open to elaborate interpretation.

  75  2 _catholic encyclopedia_, vol. xiv, p. 766.

  76 20 j. n. figgis, _political thought in the sixteenth
          century_, cambridge modern history, vol. iii, p. 743.

  79  4 cf. j. n. figgis, op. cit., p. 742.

  80 20 for an able recent exposition by an american of this
          theory of absolutism, cf. charles c. marshall, _the roman
          catholic church in the modern state_.

  85 24 cited r. h. tawney, _religion and the rise of
          capitalism_, p. 44.

  86 13 cited tawney, op. cit., p. 243.

  98  6 the facts cited in this section are from: e. mâle, _l’art
          religieux du xiiieme siècle en france_, and _l’art
          religieux de la fin du moyen-age en france_. but cf. g. g.
          coulton, _art and the reformation_.

 102 28 _prometheus unbound_, cited a. n. whitehead, _science
          and the modern world_, p. 119.

 104 23 r. h. wilenski, _the modern movement in art_, p. 5.

 109 10 cf. diego rivera, _the revolution in painting_, in
          creative art, vol. iv, no. 1. “and there is absolutely
          no reason to be frightened because the subject is so
          essential. on the contrary, precisely because the
          subject is admitted as a prime necessity, the artist is
          absolutely free to create a thoroughly plastic form of
          art. the subject is to the painter what the rails are
          to a locomotive. he cannot do without it. in fact, when
          he refuses to seek or accept a subject, his own plastic
          methods and his own esthetic theories become his subject
          instead. and even if he escapes them, he himself becomes
          the subject of his work. he becomes nothing but an
          illustrator of his own state of mind, and in trying to
          liberate himself he falls into the worst form of slavery.
          that is the cause of all the boredom which emanates
          from so many of the large expositions of modern art, a
          fact testified to again and again by the most different
          temperaments.”

 109 18 bernard berenson, _the florentine painters of the
          renaissance_, p. 19.

 111  4 cf. r. h. wilenski, _the modern movement in art_, p. 119.

 116  4 cf. george santayana, _reason in religion_, pp. 92 et
          seq. [p335]

 119 28 cf. _catholic encyclopedia_, vol. x, p. 342.

 123 17 whitehead, _science and the modern world_, p. 257.

 127  2 a. s. eddington, _stars and atoms_, p. 121.

 128  1 john herman randall jr., _the making of the modern mind_,
          p. 100.

 128  9 _epist. ad can grand_, cited in footnote to _paradiso_ in
          the temple classics.

 129  3 cf. p. w. bridgman, _the logic of modern physics_, p. 45.

 129 23 c. s. peirce, _how to make our ideas clear in chance,
          love and logic_, edited by morris r. cohen.

 130  4 bridgman, op. cit., p. 38.

 135  2 cited l. r. farnell, _the attributes of god_, p. 275.

 137 31 cf. m. c. otto, _natural laws and human hopes_, pp. 32
          et seq.

 146 29 the _catholic encyclopedia_, vol. xii, p. 345.

 147 29 cf. b. l. manning, _the people’s faith in the time of
          wyclif_.

 148  3 fosdick, _adventurous religion_, p. 85 et seq.

 148  9 santayana, _reason in religion_, p. 43.

 148 17 l. r. farnell, _the attributes of god_, p. 15.

 149 14 manning, op. cit.

 159  2 herbert asbury, _a methodist saint, the life of bishop
          asbury_, p. 265.

 160 20 cf. _encyclopedia britannica_, “asceticism.”

 161 17 cf. _catholic encyclopedia_, vol. i, p. 768.

 162  5 quoted in irving babbitt, _rousseau and romanticism_, p. 45.

 162 19 _rabelais_, book ii, chapter 34.

 163  6 cited henry osborn taylor, _thought and expression in the
          sixteenth century_, vol. i, p. 330.

 163 25 babbitt, op. cit., p. 161.

 163 28 cf. dora russell, _the right to be happy_.

 164  5 cf. bertrand russell, _political ideals_.

 165 17 t. w. rhys davids, _buddhism_, p. 111.

 166 22 _ethics_, book ii, chapter 9.

 177  3 s. freud, _formulierung über die zwei prinzipien des
          psychischen geschehens_, 1911, jahrb, bd., i, s. 411.

 177 10 s. ferenczi, _stages in the development of the sense of
          reality_, 1913. in _contributions to psychoanalysis_,
          translated by dr. ernest jones.

 192 13 spinoza, _ethics_, part v, prop. xlii.

 192 23 cf. t. w. rhys davids, _buddhism_, p. 110.

 192 31 _confucian analects_, book ii, chapter 4.

 195 25 a. n. whitehead, _religion in the making_, pp. 15–16. [p336]

 196 20 _analects_ vii, xx.

 197 24 _ethics_, part v, prop. xlii.

 199 19 cf. t. w. rhys davids, _buddhism_, p. 84.

 199 30 c. snouck hurgronje, _mohammedanism_, p. 82.

 200 18 _republic_, vi, 495, 504.

 205  5 cf. j. burnet, _philosophy_ in _the legacy of greece_,
          edited by r. w. livingstone, p. 67.

 218  9 lucretius, _on the nature of things_, book third,
          translation by h. a. j. munro.

 220  1 spinoza, _ethics_, part v, prop. iii.

 220  4 id., part v, prop. vi.

 224 28 aristotle, _ethics_, book iv, chapter iii.

 232 18 oswald spengler, _the decline of the west_.

 233 25 c. a. beard, _is western civilization in peril?_
          harper’s magazine, august, 1928.

 234 17 h. g. wells, _the outline of history_, vol. ii, pp. 394–5.

 235 30 a. n. whitehead, _science and the modern world_, p. 4.

 236 10 w. t. sedgwick and h. w. tyler, _a short history of
          science_, p. 269. cf. martha ornstein, _the role of
          scientific societies in the seventeenth century_.

 237  7 j. b. bury, _the idea of progress_, p. 330.

 238 16 for a most illuminating description of the behavior of a
          great scientific investigator, cf. claude bernard, _an
          introduction to the study of experimental medicine_.

 238 26 bertrand russell, _mysticism and logic_, p. 42.

 240 19 cf. graham wallas, _our social heritage_, chapter i.

 241 12 john herman randall jr., _the making of the modern
          mind_, p. 279.

 242 24 adam smith, _the wealth of nations_, book iv, chapter 9.

 245  4 cited in r. h. tawney, _religion and the rise of
          capitalism_, p. 286.

 265 19 otto gierke, _political theories of the middle age_,
          translated by f. w. maitland, p. 23.

 266  9 id., p. 88.

 266 12 cf. j. w. garner, _introduction to political science_, p. 92.

 267  7 for a discussion of the concept of sovereignty in the
          modern world, cf. otto gierke, _political theories of
          the middle ages_; j. n. figgis, _churches in the modern
          state_; lord acton, _history of freedom and other essays_;
          h. j. laski, _a grammar of politics_; kung chuan hsiao,
          _political pluralism_.

 274 11 william hard, _who’s hoover?_ p. 193.

 280 31 _reflections on the french revolution_, cf. garner, op.
          cit., p. 112. [p337]

 288  6 genesis xxxviii; cf. harold cox, _the problem of
          population_, pp. 208–211, for an interpretation of the
          story of onan in the light of deut. xxv, which shows that
          the crime of onan was not the spilling of his seed, but a
          breach of jewish tribal law in refusing “to perform the
          duty of a husband’s brother” with his brother’s widow.

 289  1 psalm 127, cf. cox, op. cit.

 289  9 the historical data are from a. m. carr-saunders, _the
          population problem_, chapter i.

 295  6 havelock ellis, _love as an art_, in count hermann
          keyserling’s _the book of marriage_, p. 388.

 295 21 santayana, _the life of reason_, vol. ii, p. 10.

 297  3 c. e. m. joad, _thrasymachus_, or _the future of morals_,
          pp. 54–55.

 297 15 havelock ellis, _the family_, in _whither mankind_, p. 216.

 299  4 quoted in judge ben b. lindsey and wainwright evans, _the
          companionate marriage_, p. 210.

 302 18 cf. alfred weber, _history of philosophy_, p. 72.

 304 24 _love—or the life and death of a value_, atlantic
          monthly, august, 1928.

 310 14 _reason in society_, p. 22.

 313  6 w. r. inge, _the philosophy of plotinus_, vol. ii, p. 161.

 320 15 john keats, letters to john taylor, feb. 27, 1818—in
          _oxford book of english prose_, no. 379.




                              index [p339]


  absolute state, 80

  absolutism, 266

  _accademia dei lincei_, 236

  “acids of modernity.” _see_ modernity.

  acquisitive instinct, 250

  acton, lord, 56

  adams, henry, 71

  adeimantus, 160

  adultery, 89

  “agnostic,” 28, 77

  agnostics, 29, 54

  agnosticism, 34

  allegiance, 263, 265, 267, 268–269

  allegory, 37, 38–40

  american farmer, 85, 276

  americanism, 61, 63, 274

  american philosophical association, 236

  anabaptists, 15

  analysis, scientific, 107

  ananias, 95

  anarchy, moral, 209

  anne, st., 149

  anthropomorphism, 28, 148

  anti-evolution laws, 31

  antioch, 51, 52

  apostles, 58, 99, 120, 200

  aquinas, st. thomas, 11, 68, 71, 100, 218, 323

  arcadia, 148, 162

  arians, 52

  aristocracy, 15

  aristophanes, 4

  aristotle, 26, 48, 127, 156, 157, 161, 166–167, 194, 224, 244, 319

  art, 112;
    christian, 101;
    for art’s sake, 101, 104–105, 107

  artist, modern, 108–109

  artists and the catholic church, 98–101, 104

  asbury, bishop, 158

  asbury, herbert, 158

  asceticism, 155, 156–161, 191, 192, 204, 205

  astronomers, newtonian, 123

  atheism, 28, 324

  “atheist,” 28, 29

  atheists, 6, 54, 194

  augsburg, peace of, 79

  augustine, st., 37, 38, 69, 71, 73, 113, 196

  authority, 13, 14, 166, 202, 262, 272, 317, 326;
    divine, 135;
    ecclesiastical, 14–15, 35, 76, 93, 133, 236;
    moral, 9


  bacon, 324

  baxter, 86

  beard, charles a., 233, 235

  beauty, religion of, 18

  beauvais, vincent de, 99

  behavior, 171–172, 186

  behaviorism, 174, 177

  belief, childish, 185, 189, 190

  berenson, 109

  bergson, 107

  berlin academy, 236

  besant, mrs., 290

  betelguese, 169

  bible, 13, 23, 27, 34–35, 37, 38–39, 40, 41, 44, 45, 46, 47–48, 60,
        78, 121, 131, 132, 162, 214, 288;
    epic of, 116, 117

  biblical world, 40

  bigotry, 190

  bill of rights, 114

  biologists, 150–151, 325

  birth control, 93, 285, 287, 289–291, 292–293, 296–297, 298–299, 301,
        305–306, 307

  bishop of rome, 71

  bodin, jean, 262

  bolshevism, 251–253, 254–255 [p340]

  bradlaugh, 290

  breuer, 220

  bridgman, prof., 129

  broadway temple, 88

  brownell, w. c., 24

  bryan, 77

  buddha, 46, 155, 156, 161, 165, 193, 194, 199, 200

  buffon, 241

  bunyan, john, 86

  bureaucracy, 249–250

  burke, edmund, 280

  bury, prof. john b., 236

  business, 231, 284;
    and the catholic church, 84–88;
    organized, 244;
    stabilization of, 256

  byron, 5, 6


  calles, 264, 265

  calvin, 13, 39, 73, 74, 135

  calvinism, 13

  canby, henry seidel, 17

  capitalism, 16, 85, 245, 247–248, 250–251;
    primitive, 251–252;
    rise of, 232, 245–246

  capitalists, 242;
    abolition of, 249–250;
    coercion of, 248–249

  capitalistic credo, 244–245

  caste, 199

  catholic church, 7, 15, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 49, 58, 72, 73, 77, 81,
        84–85, 86, 94, 98, 117, 120, 161, 205–206, 291

  _catholic encyclopedia_, 51, 74

  catholicism, 11, 15, 35, 58, 78, 81, 86, 109

  catholics, 74, 76–77

  cause and effect, 181

  cecilia, st., 98–99

  certainty, feeling of, 19, 21, 322

  certainty, moral. _see_ moral certainty.

  chateaubriand, 5

  chesterton, g. k., 56–57

  children and the churches, 91, 93

  christ, 13, 14, 23, 29–30, 33, 58, 74, 99, 205;
    _see also_ jesus.

  “christ, athletes of,” 160

  christian capitalism, 87

  _christian directory_, 86

  christian doctrine, 152, 163

  christian fathers, 207

  christianity, 8–9, 11, 29–30, 32, 34, 55, 58, 205–206, 250;
    foundations of, 51

  _christianity and liberalism_, 32

  christian socialism, 87

  chrysostom, st., 51–54

  church and state, 75, 79–80, 112

  church attendance, 48

  church councils, 58

  church of england, 266

  church of st. urban, 98

  _city of god_, 69, 71;
    _see also “civitas dei.”_

  civilization, cycle of, 232;
    modern, 4, 9, 62, 230, 233–234, 237, 240, 241, 265, 267, 271, 273,
        300, 327;
    roman, 233–234;
    technological, 233, 238, 240

  civil service, 271–272

  civil war, 66

  _civitas dei_, 70;
    _see also “city of god.”_

  commercial enterprise, 86

  commonsense, religion of, 44, 45

  _commonweal_, 34

  communities, homogeneous, 270–271

  competition, 247;
    free, 244

  compulsions, old and new, 9–10

  comstock, anthony, 156

  conceptions of god, 51;
    eighteenth-century, 55;
    luther’s, 53;
    mediæval, 55, 71–72;
    modernist, 55;
    oriental, 55;
    st. chrysostom’s, 52–53

  concepts, fixed, 171

  _conclusions to the renaissance_, 106

  conduct, human, 145, 230, 284, 323

  conformity, 12, 324–325, 328

  confucius, 193, 196, 258, 327

  conventions, new, 12

  conversion, 192, 198

  council of vienna, 87

  counter-reformation, 94, 96

  courage, 222–223

  cox, harold, 288 [p341]

  creation, 99;
    theory of, 11

  creative evolution, 18, 117, 131

  creator, dependence on, 69

  credulity, modern, 8–9

  creeds, profusion of, 110

  _critique of pure reason_, 136

  cults, modern, 9, 14, 125–126

  culture, theocratic, 164, 175, 221

  curia, 81

  curiosity, 129–130

  custom, 166, 167, 241, 327


  dante, 11, 68, 69, 128, 323

  darwin, 210

  darwinism, 125, 132, 174

  darrow, clarence, 13

  davids, rhys, 165

  decoding the bible, 41, 47

  della porta, 236

  democracy, 15, 264, 278

  desire, reform of, 201, 202, 282, 320–321

  desires, human, 145, 146, 165, 167–170, 172, 180, 182, 186, 190, 193,
        206, 216, 310–311, 319

  destiny, human, 133, 184, 218, 324

  development, concept of, 171–172, 174, 191;
    industrial, 245–246, 252, 253–254, 255, 257, 258

  _dialogue of dives and pauper_, 147

  dictatorship, military, 253, 264

  disciplines, 202, 203, 205

  disillusionment, 17, 326

  disinterestedness, 204, 206, 209, 210, 221, 225, 230–231, 237,
        238–239, 243, 258, 272, 281, 283, 311, 313, 323, 327, 330

  disorders, social, 191–192, 206

  disposition to believe, 143

  _divine comedy_, 69, 128

  divine government, sense of, 72, 95, 194;
    theory of, 71–72, 82, 175

  divine right of kings, 79, 265

  divorce, 299, 308

  doge, 81

  dogma, 13, 96, 125, 133, 176, 244

  domain of religion, 82

  donne, john, 40

  doubt, freedom from, 16


  ecclesiastical establishments, 196, 201, 314–315

  eckhart, 196

  economic order, new, 86, 246–248

  eddington, dr., 127

  eden, 37

  education, 175, 184, 191, 192, 198, 230

  eighteenth century, 154, 174, 266, 289

  _élan vital_, 55

  eliot, t. s., 303

  ellis, havelock, 293, 295–296, 297, 301, 305

  emancipation, 19;
    of women, 91–92

  emotions, 220

  _encyclopedia britannica_, 289

  england, 253–254, 272, 273

  environment, 145, 172, 180, 181, 184, 189, 190, 247, 250

  epistles of st. paul, 44

  erasmus, 196

  _essay on population_, 289

  estheticism, 105, 107

  ethical codes, 49, 165

  _ethics_, 166

  evil, problem of, 145, 156, 213, 214, 216–217, 218, 329;
    sense of, 188, 189, 218–219

  evils, social, 243

  evolution, 60, 117, 122, 125, 132, 171, 210, 231;
    _see also_ creative evolution.

  excommunication, 76

  executives, modern business, 256–257

  exhibition of london, 236–237

  existence, 108, 117, 123

  exodus, 27, 118

  experience, christian, 33;
    esthetic, 106;
    lessons of, 181, 182, 183, 186, 188, 189, 192, 195, 227;
    scientific, 220


  faith, age of, 83, 322;
    questions of, 77 [p342]

  fallacy, 167, 168

  family, 88, 91–92, 93

  fanaticism, 271

  faraday, 240

  fascism, 251–253, 254

  _faust_, 116

  federal council of churches of christ, 87

  ferenczi, dr. s., 177–179

  fetich worship, 160

  feudal system, 85–86, 242, 252, 253, 263, 266–267

  figgis, dr., 76, 81

  fildes, mrs., 289–290

  flaubert, 7

  ford, henry, 64

  fornication, 89

  fosdick, rev. harry emerson, 21–22, 40, 41, 42, 45–46, 47, 97, 147–148

  fourth gospel, 11, 44, 194

  francis, st., 69, 113

  franklin, benjamin, 236

  freedom, 17, 136, 242, 262, 315, 326, 327;
    religious, 75

  french academy of sciences, 236

  freud, 107, 157, 176, 177, 179, 220

  _fruits of philosophy_, 290

  fundamentalism, 30–31, 34–35, 64

  fundamentalists, 31, 33–34, 51, 60, 77


  galileo, 123–124, 236

  gargantua, 162–163

  genesis, 27, 38, 131, 132, 325

  geneva, 74

  genteel, cult of, 155

  gentleman, ideal of, 167

  germany, 254, 272

  _gestalt-theorie_, 174, 177

  gierke, 70

  giotto, 109

  gnostics, 52

  god, attributes of, 213–214, 215–216

  gods, greek, 10, 302

  godlessness, 194

  gods, popular. _see_ theology, popular.

  golden age, 151

  golden mean, 166–167, 180

  good and evil, 135, 137, 153, 168, 170, 172, 214–215, 320

  “good life,” 156, 172, 191, 202, 319, 323

  good samaritan, 37

  gospels, 37, 44, 206, 325

  government, 231, 275–276, 278–279

  grace, meaning of, 58;
    religion of, 12

  greek church, 51


  hammurabi, code of, 136

  happiness, pursuit of, 4, 153, 166, 198, 328–329

  heaven, christian, 146

  hedonism, 301–302, 304, 319

  hegesias, 302

  hellenism, 322

  hemingway, ernest, 303

  hera, 148

  _heretics_, 56

  heroism, 156

  hertz, 240

  heterodoxy, 12, 62

  hierarchies, 92, 263, 265, 268

  higher criticism, 40

  “higher sense,” 11

  high religion, 193, 203–204, 207, 208, 230, 239;
    function of, 193;
    insight of, 207–208, 209, 230, 239, 251

  hildebrand, 58

  historians, philosophic, 232

  historical scholarship, 157

  history, 143, 157

  hobbes, 266

  holy land, 149

  holy see, 73, 74

  homer, 10, 43

  hooker, richard, 266

  hoover, 273–274

  hope and fear, 321, 330

  hosea, 12

  human development, 177, 234

  humanism, 137–139, 143–144, 164, 166, 167, 172, 175, 196, 221

  humanity, religion of, 18 [p343]

  human nature, 157, 161, 164, 165, 169, 171–172, 173, 175–176,
        183–184, 207, 227, 306, 327

  huss, 73

  huxley, aldous, 303

  huxley, thomas henry, 6


  iconoclasm, 17, 96, 315

  iconoclasts, 15, 302

  idealism, debacle of, 17

  ideals, foundation of, 133, 224, 323;
    succession of, 111

  ideas, crystallization of, 20

  idols, smashing of, 15, 16

  illusions, 8, 189, 232

  immortality, 11, 41–43, 45, 122, 180, 188

  impersonal, worship of the, 44

  impulses, 165–166, 168, 169, 192, 222, 224, 227, 306

  industry, ideals of, 258–259;
    modern, 248, 251, 255–256, 260, 273–274, 288

  inertia, human, 208, 227

  infallibility, 81

  infantilism, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 181, 182, 184, 185, 189–190, 191

  inferno, 146

  inge, dean, 28, 29–30, 42, 44, 46, 196, 313, 314

  inquiry, disinterested, 132;
    freedom of, 126

  inquisition, 123–124, 161

  inspiration, 13, 46

  intelligence, 186;
    machinery of, 64

  interests, diversification of, 267–268, 269–270, 274, 328

  internal life, 152, 195, 196

  invention of invention, 235

  inventions, mechanical, 234–235

  irreligion, modern, 12, 53–54

  isaiah, 12

  italy, 251–253, 272


  james i, 79

  james, william, 18, 24–26

  jefferson, 15

  jehovah, 12, 214, 288;
    _see also_ yahveh.

  jerome, st., 161

  jesus, 12, 46, 99, 119, 155, 193, 199, 200;
    _see also_ christ.

  jews, 52

  joad, c. e. m., 296, 297, 315–316

  job, 213–216

  job, book of, 214, 216

  john, gospel of. _see_ fourth gospel.

  john, st., 99

  joyce, james, 303

  judaism, 12

  judgment, private, 15, 34


  kant, immanuel, 136–137

  keats, 320

  kelvin, lord, 129

  keynes, maynard, 245, 258

  knowledge, limitations of, 202

  knowlton, 290

  knox, 73

  krutch, joseph wood, 302–303, 304

  ku klux klan, 31


  labor, organized, 244

  _laissez-faire_, 242, 244, 250, 252

  lake, kirsopp, 27–29

  lamarckism, 125

  “land of heart’s desire,” 151–152

  last judgment, 99

  law enforcement, 277–278

  law, international, 265–266

  lawrence, d. h., 303

  leadership, mass, 274–275

  legislation, modern, 275–276, 279

  lent, 1492, 38

  leviticus, 37

  lewis, sinclair, 16

  liberalism, 6, 152

  liberals, protestant, 34;
    religious, 21, 33

  liberty, natural, 243, 244–246, 258

  life, art of, 175, 326–327;
    mediæval view of, 154, 323;
    wisdom of, 156, 330

  lindbergh, col. charles a., 222–223 [p344]

  lindsey, judge, 298, 307

  locke, 266

  love, art of, 293, 295, 301, 303, 305, 308–309;
    value of, 302–304, 306, 310

  lowell lectures, 25

  loyalty, 261–263, 268–269, 272, 325

  lucretius, 218

  luther, 13, 14–15, 39, 53–54, 73–74, 79, 196

  lutheran church, 13

  lutherans, 77


  machen, prof. j. gresham, 32, 33–34

  machine process, 246, 253–254, 274

  machine technology, 242–243, 247, 251, 252, 254, 257, 258–259, 274,
        284, 316

  mâle, 100, 101

  malthus, 289

  manichæans, 52

  man, nature of, 152, 243

  manner of life, 235

  markets, 246–247

  marriage, 89, 286, 288, 289, 291, 309, 310–311, 312;
    companionate, 298, 307

  marxianism, 16

  mary, st. _see_ virgin mary.

  masses, 148–149, 278

  matriarchal societies, 91

  maturity, 174–175, 176–177, 179–180, 183–184, 185, 186, 189, 190,
        191–192, 204, 209, 225, 230, 237, 239, 313, 323, 325, 327,
        328–329

  maxwell, 240

  mazzini, 18

  meaning of things, 183

  mechanism, 125, 128, 130–131

  medical progress, 218

  melanchthon, 79

  mencken, h. l., 13, 16

  mendel’s law, 231

  messianic kingdom, 11

  methodism, 6;
    american, 158

  mexico, 253, 265

  middle ages, 70–72, 73, 94, 129, 131, 161, 265, 266

  mill, james, 289

  milton, 74, 266

  minority, recalcitrant, 279

  miracles, 118, 119–120

  mississippi flood, 273–274

  modernism, 18, 32, 33, 59, 77, 117, 217

  modernists, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 35, 42, 51

  modernity, 5, 8, 14, 15, 19, 56, 68, 96, 105, 110, 112, 143, 158,
        196–197, 208, 229, 251, 284, 316, 318, 320, 321

  modern man, 4, 8–10, 12, 19, 21, 24, 40, 41, 51, 54, 57, 59, 94, 111,
        112, 113, 114, 152, 153, 158, 161, 194, 203, 227–228, 315, 316

  modern men. _see_ modern man.

  _modern movement in art, the_, 104

  modern spirit, 36, 110, 143

  modern state, 260, 262–263, 267, 272–273, 275, 279, 311

  modern world, 14, 19, 20, 268–269, 270, 300, 311, 322–324

  mohammed, 145

  mohammedanism, 199

  monasticism, 204–206

  montaigne, 48, 175, 196

  moral certainty, 9–10, 15, 115

  moral codes, 3, 49, 135, 167, 170, 171, 201, 208–209, 226, 228, 272,
        317, 319

  moral confusion, 155, 228, 230

  moral effect, 179–180

  moral effort, 175

  moral guidance, 14, 205

  moral insight, 227–228, 229

  moralists, 164, 165, 166, 167, 170, 172, 173, 208–209, 225, 244, 300,
        314–315, 316–319, 320–321, 323

  morality, 114–115, 117, 136, 137–139, 145;
    divine, 49–50;
    sanctions of, 78, 166, 176, 228;
    theistic, 138;
    _see also_ morals.

  moral law, 46, 48, 191, 233 [p345]

  moral philosophies, 156

  moral problem, 134, 166, 168, 192, 229, 312, 317

  morals, 17, 112, 151, 157, 192, 208, 210, 227–228, 229, 241, 322;
    _see also_ morality.

  moral values, 106

  morris, william, 5, 244

  mortality, 188, 191

  mosaic law, 136

  moses, 49

  moving pictures, 6

  music, 182

  musset, alfred de, 163

  mystics, 147, 196


  nain, 119

  naples, 236

  nationalism, 63–64, 232

  natural goodness, 163

  natural man, 19, 162, 163, 241

  natural selection, 18, 150

  nature and science, 241

  nature, laws of, 117, 122, 125, 150, 165, 195;
    religion of, 18

  necessity, experience of, 187

  need to believe, 125, 203

  neo-malthusianism, 289–290

  neo-platonism, christian, 28

  neo-platonists, modern, 11

  new jerusalem, 115, 116

  newspapers, popular, 6, 64–65

  new york, 66, 271, 273

  nicæa, second council of, 98, 100, 101

  nietzsche, 7, 157

  nietzscheanism, 16

  nineteenth century, 5, 16, 18, 174, 288, 309

  nirvana, 145, 165, 199

  noah’s ark, 38

  noguchi, 223

  non-sectarianism, 77–78

  novels, autobiographical, 113


  objectivity, 132

  obregon, gen., 264

  old testament, 55, 214

  onan, 288

  order, ancestral, 68, 153, 207, 208, 228, 267, 314, 322;
    cosmic, 8, 195, 202, 216;
    industrial, 242

  origen, 11, 28, 29, 37, 39, 196

  original sin, 198

  “orthodox,” 57, 122

  orthodoxy, 10, 11, 12, 19–20, 32, 35, 194, 216

  “overbeliefs,” 24


  pach, walter, 95

  pagans, 52

  painting, religious, 94–96, 97–98

  pantagruelists, 162

  pantheism, 117–118

  paradise, 128, 145, 146

  _paradise lost_, 116

  parenthood, 292–294, 301, 305

  paris, 111, 223

  passions, harmony of, 198, 206, 208

  _pater_, 149

  pater, walter, 106–107

  patriotism, 18, 78, 82

  paul, st., 12–13, 50, 52, 58, 90, 99, 155, 161

  peace of mind, 7–8

  peirce, charles s., 129

  periclean age, 11, 232

  personality, persistence of, 42

  peter, st., 72, 74, 99, 146

  petrarch, 5

  _phædo_, 159

  pharisees, 12, 317, 319

  philistines, 104

  philosophers, greek, 10, 159, 233, 235–236

  philosophy, 324;
    industrial, 243, 260;
    modern, 157, 158;
    political, 260

  physicists, 102, 124, 129

  physics, 143, 157, 174, 241

  _pilgrim’s progress, the_, 200

  place, francis, 289

  plato, 10, 48, 156, 159, 161, 200, 289

  platonic tradition, 28

  platonism, 43

  platonists, 42–43, 196

  pleasure and pain, 177, 179, 302 [p346]

  plot, john, 149

  plotinus, 155

  political conduct, 264–265, 284

  political machine, 264

  politician, the, 279–282

  pope, the, 13, 15, 72, 79, 81, 85, 265, 270–271

  pope innocent iv, 85

  pope paul v, 81

  pope pius ix, 75

  population, growth of, 289–291

  post-darwinians, 18

  pragmatism, 119

  prayer, 146–149

  pre-machine age, 253

  presbyterians, 79

  priesthood, 73

  primitive peoples, 159

  procreation, 166

  progress, religion of, 18

  prohibition, 31, 277

  propaganda, 281

  prophet, artist as, 101–102, 103, 104

  prophets, 12

  protestantism, 15, 30, 32, 34, 52, 77, 86

  protestants, 34–35

  pseudo-religions, 125

  psychiatry, 158, 159

  psychoanalysis, 6, 125, 174, 177, 179, 220

  psychology, 143, 171, 172, 173, 174, 220;
    abnormal, 171;
    folk, 171;
    popular, 114;
    scientific, 173, 176

  public interest, 257–258

  public opinion, 167

  public schools, 76–77

  public utilities, regulation of, 254–255

  purgatory, 146

  puritanism, 154, 302

  purpose, cosmic, 9

  pythagoras, 204–205


  rabelais, 161, 162–163

  randall, dr., 127–128

  rationalists, 24–25

  rationalization, 39

  reality, 177, 179, 180, 193, 216, 272, 312, 319

  reason and faith, 51, 121

  rebellion, 16–17, 19, 190

  rebels, 15–18, 19

  reconstruction, essays in, 14

  redemption, 11, 115

  reformation, 13, 72–73, 94, 154

  reformers, eighteenth-century, 15;
    protestant, 34, 39, 40, 73, 96

  relative motion, 124

  religion, 8, 10, 17, 18–19, 23, 112, 123, 131, 284, 324;
    aristocracy in, 197, 200, 202, 203;
    need of, 123;
    of the spirit, 44, 46, 196–197, 203, 205–206, 327–328;
    popular, 14, 32–33, 47, 50, 69, 91, 94, 127, 131–132, 143, 145,
        176, 194, 195–196, 201, 202, 208, 216, 227, 232, 244, 325 (_see
        also_ theology, popular);
    traditional, 122, 124, 203

  religious experience, 33, 90–91, 125, 325–326

  religious synthesis, 111, 124

  religious thought, 96

  religious wars, 74

  religious writing, 97

  renaissance, 94–95, 161;
    high, 154

  renan, 7

  renunciation, 45, 156, 157, 191, 192, 206

  _republic_, 159–160

  revelation, 124, 126, 127, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 143, 318, 326;
    logic of, 121;
    sense of, 13

  revivals, 14

  revolution, french, 289;
    industrial, 210, 248;
    mechanical, 19, 234, 236, 241, 248, 289;
    russian, 250–251;
    spiritual, 133–134

  rewards and punishments, 201, 202, 213

  riggs, father, 34

  righteousness, sense of, 16

  right of revolution, 82

  right to believe, 25

  rights of men, 242, 267

  roland, 71 [p347]

  roman catholic church. _see_ catholic church.

  roman empire, 58, 205

  romantics, 18, 26, 154

  rome, 149, 236

  rousseau, 154, 266

  royal society of london, 236

  ruskin, 244

  russell, bertrand, 27, 114, 157, 238, 298–299, 308

  russell, dora, 163

  russia, 250–253, 272, 273


  sages, teaching of, 198, 200, 210, 239

  saintliness, 156

  salvation, 75, 88, 147, 195–197, 198, 201, 313

  santayana, george, 19, 35, 36, 43, 68, 145, 148, 182, 310, 311

  sargent, john, 95

  savonarola, 37

  schoolmen, 127, 129

  science, 10, 18, 19, 112, 120, 123, 153, 176, 205;
    and religion, 123–124, 132–133;
    concepts in, 102–103, 107, 122;
    greek, 210;
    logic of, 121;
    mediæval, 128;
    method of, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 157, 239;
    modern, 127, 128, 236–237, 239, 316;
    popular, 127;
    pure, 237–238, 239

  _science and the modern world_, 123

  scientific discipline, 239–240, 241

  scientific explanation, 130, 131

  scientific hypotheses, 125, 126–127

  scientific inquiry, 35, 123, 236

  scientific materialism, 131

  scientific method. _see_ science, method of.

  scientific research, 236–237, 238

  scientific spirit, 240, 327

  scientific theory, 133, 209

  scribes, 12

  scriptures. _see_ bible.

  self-discipline, 45, 196–197, 198

  serenity, 7–8

  sex, 284–285, 288, 299–300, 306, 308;
    and religion, 89–90

  sexual conventions, 299–300, 301, 307–308

  sexual ideal, 93–94, 293, 301, 305–306, 307

  sexuality, 150, 165–166, 303–304

  sexual relations, 231, 284–287, 288–289, 291–292, 295–296, 297, 299,
        308, 312

  shaw, george bernard, 18, 48, 156

  shelley, 5–6, 102

  simeon stylites, st., 158

  sinai, 136, 227

  smith, adam, 242, 243, 245

  “social compact,” 266–267

  socialism, 249–250, 258

  socialists, 249, 250, 252

  social system, american, 65–67, 273–274

  society, 19, 190, 206, 207, 241, 250, 266, 276, 284, 322;
    opinion of, 134

  socrates, 10, 11, 155, 159, 160, 161, 219, 220

  song of solomon, 38

  sophists, 219, 220

  sophisticated violence, 64

  soul, 114, 196

  sovereignty, conception of, 265, 267

  space, sense of, 180

  species, propagation of, 150

  speculation, philosophic, 233

  spengler, 62, 232

  spinoza, 155, 156, 161, 192, 193, 194, 197, 216, 219, 220, 266

  spirituality, 154, 197, 204, 329–330

  staël, madame de, 162

  statesman, the, 279–283

  steele, richard, 86

  stimuli, 182

  stoddard, lothrop, 64

  suffering, irrational, 213

  _summa_, 100

  supernatural kingdom, 143, 325–326

  superstition, 218

  survival of the fittest, 150

  syllabus of pope pius ix, 314

  symbolism, 34, 45, 68, 100, 325 [p348]


  tabu, 160

  tamar, 288

  tariff, 276–277

  ten commandments, 78

  tennessee, 77

  theism, 136, 137

  theocracy, 194, 195, 197, 203, 227, 228

  theodorus of cyrene, 301–302

  theology, catholic, 51, 119;
    popular, 10–11, 23 (_see also_ religion, popular)

  thirteenth century, 11

  thomas à kempis, 113

  thomson, james, 5

  thought, contemporary, 194;
    scientific, 125, 235

  time, sense of, 181

  toleration, 74–77, 123

  totemism, 160

  towns, rise of, 19, 232

  _tradesman’s calling, the_, 86

  traditions, religious, 61–62, 96, 97

  transubstantiation, 58

  trent, council of, 14, 100–101

  trinity, 70

  _true law of free monarchy_, 79

  “truth, the,” 129


  _unam sanctam_, 81

  unbelief, 3–20, 28, 228, 229, 326

  understanding, 181–183, 191, 206, 321, 329

  uneasiness, modern, 14

  united states, 253–254, 272, 274, 276, 277–278

  universe, 8, 128, 129, 145

  usury, 84, 85, 86, 87

  utopia, 151


  valerian, 98–99

  values, transvaluation of, 16, 181

  versailles, court of, 95

  vicegerent of god, 72

  victoria, queen, 155, 302

  view of life, traditional, 109

  villers, 162

  virgin mary, 96, 99, 115, 149

  virtue, 166, 192, 221–225, 226–227, 228–229, 320, 329;
    conception of, 226, 318, 319, 324

  voltaire, 16, 197


  wallas, graham, 240

  walter reed hospital, 223

  walwayn, thomas, 149

  war, abolition of, 232

  watt, james, 234, 236

  _wealth of nations_, 242

  wells, h. g., 233–234

  west, lady alice, 148–149

  whitehead, alfred north, 25–27, 123–124, 195, 236, 325

  wilenski, r. h., 104, 111

  will, human, 195

  will of god, 10, 195

  will to believe, 25, 53

  wisdom, 185–186, 198–199, 201, 226–228, 229, 244, 320, 324

  woman, economic independence of, 93

  women, chastity of, 286–288, 291

  wordsworth, 5, 18, 180

  world, character of, 186

  world’s christian fundamentalist association, 30, 31

  world war, 17, 253, 272–273

  wyclif, 37, 73

  wynne, father, 146


  yahveh, 55, 214.
    _see also_ jehovah.




*** end of the project gutenberg ebook a preface to morals ***


    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™

project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.

the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.

﻿the project gutenberg ebook of ten recreational parties
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: ten recreational parties

author: helen durham

release date: october 10, 2025 [ebook #77020]

language: english

original publication: new york: the womans press, 1924

credits: charlene taylor, super queer historian and the online distributed proofreading team at https://www.pgdp.net (this file was produced from images generously made available by the internet archive/american libraries.)


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook ten recreational parties ***


_ten recreational parties_

_by_

helen durham

  the womans press
  600 lexington avenue

  new york, n. y.


  copyright, 1924, by
  helen durham

  this is a revised and amplified edition of six recreational
  parties, by the same author. the last three are not parties,
  strictly speaking, but suggestions for adding variety to larger
  entertainments.

  printed in the united states of america




contents


                                  page

  foreword                           5

  peanut party                       7

  newspaper party                   12

  balloon party                     16

  doll party (pantomime)            20

  japanese party                    25

  george washington party           31

  circus party                      37

  italian street scene              43

  gypsy scene                       47

  christmas service                 53




foreword


as a recreational director under the war work council of the national
board of the young womens christian associations, i discovered that it
was difficult to get simple yet colorful recreational material suitable
for the various groups with whom i worked. game parties, in which
straight games were played, became tiresome. each group, accustomed
to the thrill of the movies, sooner or later demanded something
more exciting, so i hit upon the plan of combining the most popular
games, featuring with them some simple property such as balloons or
newspapers, as an entire evening’s entertainment. the peanut, newspaper
and balloon parties are the result of this experiment. then, after a
while, the groups would want to take a more active part themselves.
the japanese, doll, george washington and circus parties are the
outcome of this stage in my recreational experience. these parties are
more elaborate than the first; in fact, they require a great deal of
preparation and cooperation on the part of the group. after these came
the demand for something still more colorful and entertaining. again
i took something familiar, such as a group of songs and dances, and
combined them with some idea of the dramatic, costumed and set them
in a suitable and attractive background. the result was surprisingly
effective in spite of the simplicity of the material and the idea. the
italian street scene and the strolling gypsy scene are two examples of
this type of entertainment.

the christmas service is an example of a still more elaborate attempt
at “recreational dramatics,” as one might call this collection. the
particular merit of the tableau is that it is very simple to produce,
yet very lovely, if well done. the pictures themselves can be planned
and worked out before the tableau itself is put together. in one or two
rehearsals the music, chorus singing and the pictures can be combined.
if the performers themselves catch the spirit of the occasion the
effect of the whole is very beautiful and impressive.

                                                  helen durham.




a peanut party


in which peanuts are featured in a variety of old and new ways.

_invitations_: carefully split a large-sized peanut and fold inside
a small piece of white japanese tissue on which the invitation is
written. tie the peanut together with a narrow orange ribbon. or
write the invitation on an orange-colored card and attach to it
several round peanuts, the shells of which have been grotesquely
decorated to represent tiny faces. the color, orange, is suggested in
the invitations, properties and decorations only because it vividly
contrasts with the neutral shade of the peanut.

_properties_: upon arriving, the guests are given small orange-colored
paper or tarlatan bags in which they may keep the peanuts won in the
various games. at the end of the party there is a final counting and
the person having the greatest number of peanuts in his bag wins the
prize.

_note_: the games suggested need not be played in the following order.
this is one arrangement which has proved satisfactory for both large
and small groups. the first three games are played at a table around
which four or six people sit. a bowl of peanuts and two or three
hatpins should be placed on each table before the game starts.


1. guessing game

at a given signal from the director, each person at the table tries to
guess the number of peanuts in the bowl. after all the players have had
their chance, the peanuts are counted. the person who came nearest to
the correct number receives four peanuts as a reward, which he keeps
for the final counting. all the other peanuts are returned to the bowl
for the next game.


2. piercing game

each person is given a hatpin with which he tries to pierce the peanuts
in the bowl. he has three trials. all the peanuts he pierces he may
keep.


3. grabbing game

each person in turn grabs all the peanuts he can hold in his hand.
after counting the number grabbed, he returns all of them to the bowl
and the next player tries his grabbing capacity. the person grabbing
the largest number may keep that number of peanuts as a reward.


4. peanut relay

chairs and tables are pushed aside and the players are lined up for a
relay race in two, three or four even lines, depending upon the size of
the crowd.

draw on the floor two chalk circles for each relay line, one directly
in front of each leader and another several yards beyond, at the
farther end of the room. place one peanut in each circle. at a given
signal each leader picks up, with a table knife, the peanut from the
circle directly in front of him and runs with it to the circle at the
other end of the room. he must then pick up the peanut from that circle
and carry it back to the first circle. then he touches off the next
player in his line, who tries to do the same stunt, that is, exchange
the peanuts from one circle to the other circle. the winning line is
the one which accomplishes this feat most quickly. each member of it
gets three peanuts as a reward; the line which finishes second gets two
peanuts each.


5. peanut throwing

from these relay lines swing into one big circle, with hands joined.

place an empty waste-basket in the middle of the circle. give each
player three peanuts. at a given signal each player tries to throw his
three peanuts into the basket. those that fall on the floor he loses.
those that land in the basket he may reclaim. as a reward he receives
twice the number reclaimed.


6. peanut passing

line up two even groups facing each other with hands joined. at a given
signal each leader, the first person in each line, picks up with his
free hand as many peanuts as possible from a large bag at his feet. he
passes them to the person next to him, who in turn passes them to the
person next to him, and so on. the person at the very end of the line
deposits them in a bag at his feet. at the end of two or three minutes
a signal from the director ends the game. the peanuts passed by each
line are counted and the total amount is divided among the players of
the line which passed the greatest number in the given time.

of course in passing the peanuts the players must not unclasp hands. if
a peanut is dropped, two people with hands clasped must pick it up.


7. peanut alphabet

retain the players in the same formation as for the peanut passing.

have two sets of cardboard letters which spell the word “peanut.”
choose any twelve players, six from each side. line up these teams
of six opposite each other. give a letter “p” to the first player on
either side, a letter “e” to the next one, and so on, so that each
team spells the word “peanut.” the director then calls off a word like
“net.” each player who has the letter “n” must step out in front of his
team, holding up his letter so it may be plainly seen by the director.
the person on that team holding the “e” must step out beside him, and
so on until the required word is formed. the team that forms the words
most quickly wins. as a reward each member of the team and everyone on
that side gets a peanut. use simple words like “pa,” “tune,” “pat,”
“pen,” “aunt,” “pun,” “ate,” “pan,” and finally the word “peanut.”


8. musical peanut

let the crowd break up and seat themselves about the room.

send someone out of the room. give to any member of the group a
“musical peanut,” which is of course an ordinary peanut. explain to the
group that when the searcher enters, all must sing some popular song,
at first very softly, and then more loudly as the searcher wanders in
the vicinity of the musical peanut. the searcher is then invited in
and, guided by the song of the group, tries to find the peanut. when
the peanut is found, the person holding the musical peanut becomes the
searcher.


9. peanut bags

before the guests arrive, paper bags containing various numbers of
peanuts are strung across the end of the room, about eight feet from
the floor. give each player three peanuts and line them all up about
twenty or twenty-five feet from the bags. at a given signal the entire
line tries to hit a bag. each person has three throws. he may have the
contents of each bag he hits.

  _note_: it is usually necessary to leave someone near the line to cut
  down the bags the moment they are won, otherwise there will be much
  confusion.


10. peanut hunt

at a given signal the players scurry around, looking for peanuts which
have been hidden in all parts of the room. each player may keep all he
finds.


11. peanut prize

after the players have counted the number of peanuts won throughout the
evening, have them march to music around the room in a big circle.
when the music stops, those having less than fifteen peanuts drop out
of the circle. the marching continues until the music again stops, when
those having less than twenty-five peanuts drop out, and so on until
the person having the largest number of peanuts stands alone. as a
reward he is given a grotesque doll made of peanuts.




a newspaper party


in which newspapers are featured in a variety of ways.

have the hostesses and guests, upon arriving, dress themselves in
newspaper costumes. all sorts of unique ideas can be carried out, such
as newspaper duncecaps, bonnets, aprons, frills for collar and cuffs,
pleated skirts. it will be found that surprising originality and taste
will be shown by some. have plenty of string, pins and toothpicks at
hand, for they will be needed to keep these fragile creations in place.
open the party with a grand march and have the judges immediately award
the prize for the cleverest newspaper costume.

have the players group themselves in a three, four or five line
formation, ready to play an adaptation of bancroft’s “maze game.”


1. policeman and newsboy

the chaser, who carries a paper club, is called the “policeman.” the
runner is called the “newsboy.” have the players stand in parallel
ranks with hands joined, thereby making aisles through which the
policeman can chase the newsboy. when the director gives the order
“right face,” or “left face,” the players drop hands and face in that
direction, clasping hands with their new neighbors. in this way new
aisles are made which alter the direction in which the policeman is
running and which give the newsboy a better opportunity of escape. the
director, who tries to keep the policeman from catching the newsboy,
must give his orders with alertness and wisdom, so as to prevent the
capture. neither policeman nor newsboy can break ranks or tag across
lines. it sometimes adds excitement if two policemen are used.


2. preferred newspapers

this game is an adaptation of the familiar “black and white.”

line up the players in two even ranks down the center of the floor,
with their backs to each other. call each side after a popular local
paper. at a given signal the director shouts the name of either
newspaper. the players in the line bearing that name run frantically to
the side of the room toward which they are facing. the players on the
opposite side turn and try to catch them. those caught must go over to
the other side. the second line-up, uneven this time, proceeds in the
same way, awaiting the call of the director.


3. musical newspaper

divide the players again into the same even groups. this game is an
adaptation of the familiar “musical partners.”

every player takes a partner from his group, so that each partner has
the same newspaper name. they march around the room to music. when the
music stops for a moment, everyone must change partners, being sure
that the new partner belongs to the same paper. this necessitates hasty
shifting and much shouting of identification.


4. newspaper relay

line up the players in two or three even ranks, giving each player two
single sheets of newspaper. at a signal from the director, the leaders
race down to the opposite goal and back again, stepping only on the
sheets of paper, which they lay on the floor as they progress. the
next player in line repeats the process after he is touched off by the
preceding player. the line which finishes most quickly wins.


5. protect the newsboy

adaptation of the familiar “wolf and hind.”

the players form in a straight line with their hands around the waist
of the person ahead. at the very end of the line stands the “newsboy.”
the chaser, called the “policeman,” faces the leader of the line and
at a given signal tries to catch the newsboy. the line, however, tries
to keep itself between the policeman and the newsboy. the players must
hold on tightly to each other, so as not to break the line, thereby
enabling the policeman to dart through and get a better chance at
the newsboy. when that newsboy is caught he changes places with
the policeman, who takes the place at the head of the line. the new
policeman tries to catch the person at the very end of the line, who
has now become the newsboy.


6. catch the newsboy

adaptation of “bird cage.”

divide the players into groups of four. three of each group join hands
in a circle and call themselves “policemen;” the fourth is called the
“newsboy.” without unclasping hands, the policemen try to catch in
their ring the newsboy, who may run anywhere in the room. if he is
caught he becomes a policeman and one of the policemen takes his place.


7. preference of local papers

adaptation of familiar “jerusalem and jericho.”

the players are in circle formation. the director, who stands in the
center of the circle, takes a vote on which of the two local papers the
group prefers. the director then explains that if he calls the name of
the preferred paper, everyone must repeat the name and bow, but if he
calls the name of the unpreferred paper, everyone must repeat the name,
but not bow. if anyone bows after the name of the unpreferred paper
is called, that person must come into the center of the circle. the
director himself bows after both names, thereby trying to get the other
players to mimic him. the success of the game depends largely upon the
enthusiasm of the director and his helpers.


8. newspaper fight

blindfold any two players and give to each a club made of newspapers
folded lengthwise. spread a newspaper on the floor. at a signal from
the director, each combatant puts his left hand on this newspaper
and with his paper club in his right hand fights his opponent. being
blindfolded, both quickly lose their sense of direction, so instead of
striking each other they usually strike the floor. if there are several
pairs, each cheered by their followers, the game becomes very exciting.




balloon party


decorate the room with balloons, and perhaps crêpe paper streamers.
upon arriving give every guest a crêpe paper cap to which he may attach
a balloon for decoration. give balloons as prizes for each game. all
the balloons which are used as prizes may be effectively used as a
central decoration in some such way as follows. have a large barrel
hoop, bound with crêpe paper, suspended from the ceiling in the center
of the room. to this attach by strings dozens of colored balloons. when
a person wins a balloon, give him one of these at once or wait until
all the games are over and the final score is taken and then present
the balloons as a final ceremony.


1. balloon relay

three or four strings should be stretched tightly from one end of
the room to the other, about four feet from the floor. an ordinary
brass ring hangs on each taut string. to each of these rings attach a
bright-colored balloon.

divide the players into even groups, according to the number of
strings. line them up at one end of their respective strings. at a
given signal, the leader of each line starts blowing the balloon on his
string down to the other end of the room. after each leader has taken
his balloon down to the other end of the room, he runs back to place
and touches off the next player in line, who runs down to the balloon
and returns it to the original place in the same fashion. the third
player in line then takes his turn, and so on. of course no player must
touch the balloon with his hands. a balloon is given as a reward to the
player in each line who accomplishes the feat most quickly.


2. balloon tossing game

keep the players in the same formation. each group is given a large
sheet which they hold by the edges parallel to the floor. at a given
signal the director tosses a balloon into the center of the sheet.
each team tries to keep this balloon tossing in the air by moving the
sheet up and down. no one is allowed to touch the balloon save the
director. even if it falls to the floor the director must pick it up
and put it back in place. the group which keeps the balloon moving the
greatest number of minutes wins. each player of that winning group gets
a balloon as a prize.


3. musical balloon partners

give each person a colored balloon, being careful that there is an
even number of each color. the two people having the same color march
together. an extra person, who marches alone, is given a balloon of any
of the colors used. when the music stops, everyone must quickly change
partners, choosing a new one who carries a balloon of the same color as
his own. this gives the extra person an opportunity to get a partner,
who, however, must carry a balloon of his color. when the music again
starts, the new person left without a partner marches alone, waiting
his chance to get a partner.


4. balloon volley ball

stretch a piece of colored string across the room. the object is the
same as in volley ball, that is, to keep the balloon off the floor on
your own side and make it touch the floor on your opponents’ side. use
either one or two balloons, depending upon the number of players. of
course use only the simplest rules of volley ball, thus making the game
suitable to play in the average room. each player on the winning side
gets a balloon.


5. balloon snatching

a large balloon is placed on a chair, or preferably on a small stool,
anywhere on a line which is halfway between two even lines of players.
at a given signal a player from each line walks forward to the balloon.
each tries to snatch it and run back to his place without letting his
opponent touch him or the balloon. if he arrives safely it counts one
for his side. the next two players then try the same stunt. after each
pair of players has tried the stunt, each member of the line having the
largest score gets a balloon.


6. table balloon

the players are seated at a table. the object of the game is for each
side to bat several balloons back and forth without letting them drop
on the table. if a side fails to return the balloon while it is in
midair, it counts one against them. players may rise to bat the balloon
when it is necessary but they must immediately sit down again. each
player on the winning side gets a balloon.


7. balloon dancing

this introduces the game element into social dancing.

give to each person a colored balloon, being sure that there is an even
number of balloons of the same color. each dancer must find and dance
with a partner with a balloon of the same color. when the music stops,
everyone must find a new partner with a balloon of the same color.

give to each couple a balloon. at a given signal all start dancing, at
the same time keeping their balloons tossing in the air. if a balloon
falls to the floor it counts against that couple. the couples who keep
their balloons in constant motion throughout a dance receive a balloon
as a prize.




doll party


the invitations may be written on pieces of colored paper cut in the
shape of tiny dolls. have the guests come to the party dressed as dolls
or children and the hostesses as nursemaids.


1. doll dressing contest

place the guests at small tables on which there are bits of colored
crêpe paper, scissors, string, pins, needles and thread. give everyone
a tiny penny doll to dress. it is a good plan to have on exhibition
one or two dolls already dressed in crêpe paper, to furnish ideas
to the guests. very cleverly dressed dolls can always be bought
from the dennison company, 26th street and fifth avenue, new york.
one of these makes an excellent prize for the person who makes the
best doll costume. usually people, whether old or young, if given a
few suggestions will enter into the spirit of the game and the most
ingenious and attractive creations will be made.


2. children’s games

play the simple, familiar games such as “london bridge” or “drop the
handkerchief,” “going to jerusalem” and so on.


3. midnight in the doll shop

entertain the guests by dramatizing some children’s story, or staging a
pantomime such as the following.


midnight in the doll shop

a pantomime by barbara wellington.

  _scene_: a doll shop with counters running along left wall, back-stage
  and right.

  _characters_, from stage right to left:

    right--brownie, french doll, tin soldier.
    back--chinese, indian, jack-in-the-box, dinah, golliwog, dutch girl.
    left--two rag dolls.

  the clock strikes twelve. curtain opens on dolls lifeless on counters,
  in characteristic attitudes. brownie is sitting cross-legged; the
  french doll is holding her skirt and peeking up at the soldier; the
  soldier holds his gun, stiffly; the chinese has his arms folded, hands
  in sleeves; the indian stands with tomahawk raised; jack is in his
  box with cover shut; dinah’s hands are on her hips; golliwog’s arm is
  around her; the dutch doll has a pail on her arm; the rag dolls lean
  limply against each other.

  all slowly come to life. jack pops out of his box and goes through
  jerky exercise. a dumb-bell drill may be used (music 4-4 time). at the
  finish, indian raises tomahawk over jack with threatening attitude.
  jack pops back into box; cover shuts. indian does war-dance of seeing
  enemy, giving war cry (silently), fighting battle, and smoking
  peace-pipe.

  he ends by chasing the rag dolls down-stage and around to the right
  and center, taking his place where they were. the rag dolls do a limp
  dance exactly alike, leaning against each other and flopping heavily
  at each step. they finish by dropping down up-stage right, with feet
  straight out before them.

  jack-in-the-box pantomimes clapping and the tin soldier sends him into
  his box again by aiming his rifle. then, wound up by french doll,
  he marches forward stiffly to center-stage. she works his arms and
  head and makes him embrace her, then winds him up for dance step of
  progressing across stage, toeing out with both feet, and then in. she
  does a ballet dance kick-step as she watches him. finish off-stage.

  golliwog and dinah try to imitate them in the same positions on stage,
  and burlesque the steps. they turn it into an old-fashioned cake-walk
  and as they finish up-stage right, dinah waves her bandana and drops
  it.

  the chinese doll shuffles forward and picks bandana up, goes back
  to get his tub, scrubbing board and iron, and proceeds to launder
  handkerchief, center-stage, facing audience. he turns scrubbing board
  over for an ironing board. finishes, folds handkerchief and hands it
  to dinah with bow. goes left.

  the dutch doll comes forward, sees imaginary water splashed onto the
  floor and holds up her hands in horror. she gets pail, and kneeling,
  scrubs vigorously, facing left center and then right, on knees in each
  new position. then, trying the floor with her sabot, she puts away her
  pail and does a dutch wooden shoe dance. finishes right.

  the brownie, who has been mimicking everybody as he sat on the
  counter, right, hops down and does a clown dance, ending with a
  cartwheel, left.

  as each doll finishes his stunt he takes his place in a semicircle at
  back-stage.

  all swing into dance. as orchestra sounds cock-crow, all break line
  and scramble back to original places.

                     tableau, as in the beginning.


doll dance

  to the “parade of the wooden soldiers” from the “chauve souris,”
  published by ed. b. marks music company, 223 west 46th street, new
  york.

1. 8 measures.

  introduction--4 measures--dolls take places in line.
    (omit 28 measures of music.)
  starting r foot, kick in front, kick to side.              1 measure.
  step r foot behind l, step l to side, step r in front and
     hold.                                                   1 measure.
  repeat, starting l.                                        2 measures.
  repeat, starting r.                                        2 measures.
  repeat, starting l.                                        2 measures.

2. 8 measures.

  point r heel forward, point r toe in back.                 1 measure.
  take 3 short steps forward, starting r, and hold.          1 measure.
  repeat, starting l foot.                                   2 measures.
  step back r and kick l.                                    1 measure.
  step back l and kick r.                                    1 measure.
  step back r and kick l.                                    1 measure.
  step back l and kick r.                                    1 measure.
    (omit 4 measures of music.)

3. 16 measures

  whole line moves to r, toeing in and out, as follows: with
    heels together and toes out, rise on r toe and l heel
    and swing both feet to r so that toes are pointing in;
    then step on r heel and l toe and swing feet to r so
    that toes are pointing out again.                        1 measure.
  repeat 7 times.                                            7 measures.
  repeat, swinging feet to l instead of r so that line returns
    to original position.                                    8 measures.
    (omit 24 measures of music.)

4. 8 measures.

repeat 1.

5. 8 measures.

repeat 2.

interlude. 4 measures.

  with knees bent and feet together, jump on both feet, making
    one half-turn to r.                                      1 measure.
  jump back to place.                                        1 measure.
  jump on both feet, making one half-turn to l.              1 measure.
  jump back to place.                                        1 measure.

6. 8 measures.

  move to r with following step: step r to side, step l, toe
    beside r heel, step r to side, step l, toe beside r heel.
                                                             1 measure.
  repeat. (keep r foot on floor and knees stiff, as though
    being pushed by l foot.)                                 1 measure.
  turn in place with same step.                              2 measures.
  move back to place with same step, using l foot and r toe. 2 measures.
  turn in place with same step.                              2 measures.

7. 6 measures.

  step back r and kick l.                                    1 measure.
  step back l and kick r.                                    1 measure.
  step back r and kick l.                                    1 measure.
  step back l and kick r.                                    1 measure.
  step back r and kick l.                                    1 measure.
  step back l and kick r.                                    1 measure.

8. 8 measures.

  with very small steps run to front of stage.               4 measures.
  throw kisses to audience on all sides.                     4 measures.




a japanese party


a japanese party may be made very attractive and picturesque if
japanese costumes, properties and music are featured.

write the invitations on japanese paper fans and ask the guests to
come in japanese costume. light the room with low-hanging japanese
lanterns and decorate it with japanese screens, hangings and flowers.
artificial cherry blooms, which look surprisingly like the real ones,
can be made in the following way. out of pale pink french tissue paper
cut little circles about one and a half inches in diameter and make
a pin hole in the center of each circle. slip these circles on bare
branches, creasing them around the branch so as to give the effect of
a budding blossom. the hostesses, who are in japanese costume, should
preside over the tea trays. have the guests sit in small groups on the
floor and be served tea and rice cakes in japanese fashion. by way of
entertainment the story of puccini’s opera, “madame butterfly,” can be
told in some such charming way as the following.


the story of “madame butterfly”

a girl, dressed to represent madame butterfly, tells the story of the
opera while appropriate bits of the score are being played.

use an end or corner of the room and decorate it to represent a
japanese garden or interior. a japanese screen as a background, one or
two low-hanging lanterns, lighted, a rug and several vivid cushions on
the floor, some cherry blossoms or a low bowl of japanese flowers make
a very suitable and effective setting. madame butterfly, dressed in a
pale gray or wisteria japanese kimono and brilliant obi (sash), enters
with short, pattering steps. she wears a chrysanthemum in her hair
and perhaps she carries a japanese fan. she kneels upon the cushions
and bows in oriental fashion to her audience. after the prelude to
the opera, she begins the tale of madame butterfly. the story must be
simply and vividly told, bringing out its pathos and charm. when she
finishes she bows again to the audience, rises and makes her exit with
the same little pattering steps.

oriental bow: kneel on both knees and bend directly forward so that the
head almost touches the ground; then slowly assume an erect position.

if the narrator can sing one or two selections from the opera,
especially the famous solo “one fine day,” of course it adds
tremendously. it is very important that the music harmonize with the
words, which necessitates careful selection and practice. probably only
an accomplished musician with a feeling for atmosphere can successfully
do this.

the following song and dance can follow madame butterfly’s story.


japanese song and dance

music. geisha dance, by eduardo marzo in “dance songs of the
nations,” john church company, publishers, new york. words of the song
by margaret lacy.

to be sung by the dancers themselves, or by one or more soloists while
the dancers go through the steps.

    in a forest of japan a pretty maple grew.
    she coquetted morn and even with the strong bamboo;
    maidens hung on her their lanterns when they came to dance,
    and she watched with exultation each admiring glance.

    then her leaves would gently whisper, nestling in the breeze,
    to the pretty maidens dancing there beneath the trees,
    “o! o! dance, o pretty maidens, dance ye on the grass below,
    forward bending, lightly swaying gently to and fro.
    each of you will have a hero, loyal, brave and true,
    but not one will be more loyal than my strong bamboo.”

    when the bamboo heard her singing he was filled with glee
    and he nodded to the maple, so that she might see
    that he loved her very dearly and was worthy, too,
    of the trust that she confided in her strong bamboo.

    and the maple peeping over saw his signal sweet,
    sang again unto the maidens dancing at her feet.
    “o! o! dance, o pretty maidens, dance ye on the grass below,
    forward bending, lightly swaying gently to and fro.
    each of you will have a hero, loyal, brave and true,
    but not one will be more loyal than my strong bamboo. o!”

stage this song and dance in the same setting that was used for the
madame butterfly story. before the dancers appear, place bright
cushions, one for each dancer, on the floor in a semicircle. have eight
or more dancers enter from each side with little pattering japanese
steps, take their places behind their cushions and bow in oriental
fashion to the audience. they are dressed in bright-colored japanese
kimonos and sashes, with chrysanthemums in their hair. each carries
a fan which is held stiffly in front of her chest, with the forearm
pressed slightly against the body. the head is held to the side in a
prim little fashion such as one sees in old japanese prints. every
gesture is formal and studied. (this is the japanese pose referred to
in the dance.)


japanese dance

for the introduction any number of measures may be played while the
dancers enter and take their places.

_figure 1_--16 measures.

starting on the first word of the song, “in,” make the following
motions, keeping time with the music.

  (a) sway to the r side.         1 meas. }
      sway to the l side.         1 meas. } through word
      sway to the r side.         1 meas. } “grew.”
      body and head held erect.   1 meas. }
                                                             4 measures.

  (b) the same motions, but starting l, that is,
      sway to the l side.         1 meas. }
      sway to the r side.         1 meas. } through word
      sway to the l side.         1 meas. } “bamboo.”
      body and head held erect.   1 meas. }
                                                             4 measures.

  repeat through word “glance.”                              8 measures.

  _interlude--japanese pose._                                4 measures.

_figure 2_--16 measures.

  walk with the quick little japanese pattering steps
    described above around the cushions to r, coming back
    to place on word “below.”                                4 measures.
  repeat (b) of figure 1 through word “fro.”                 4 measures.
  walk in the same fashion as above around cushions to l,
    coming back to place on word “true.”                     4 measures.
  repeat (b) of figure 1 through word “bamboo.”              4 measures.

  _interlude--japanese pose._                                4 measures.

_figure 3_--16 measures.

  repeat (a) of figure 1 through word “glee.”                4 measures.
  nod head slowly forward.        1 meas. }
  raise head slowly.              1 meas. } through word
  repeat.                         2 meas. }    “see.”
                                                             4 measures.
  repeat (b) of figure 1, through word “too.”                4 measures.
  same nodding motion repeated twice, through word “bamboo.” 4 measures.

  _interlude--japanese pose._                                4 measures.

_figure 4_--8 measures.

  repeat (a) of figure 1, through word “sweet.”              4 measures.
  repeat (b) of figure 1, through word “feet.”               4 measures.

  _interlude_--all dancers kneel slowly forward and down
    on both knees without losing balance or bending body,
    and slowly sit back on their heels in oriental fashion.

_figure 5_--16 measures.

  repeat (a) of figure 1, through word “below.”              4 measures.
  repeat nodding motion of figure 3, through word “fro.”     4 measures.
  repeat (b) of figure 1, through word “true.”               4 measures.
  turn head slowly to r side.  1 meas.}
  turn head slowly to l side.  1 meas.} through word
  hold head, face forward.     2 meas.} “bamboo.”
                                                             4 measures.

as the dancers sing the prolonged “o” of the last two measures they
bend their bodies forward so that their heads almost touch the floor.
repeat the music until they rise and exit with the same little
pattering steps.


pantomime or play

“cat fear,” a fanciful japanese comedy in pantomime by marion n.
gleason,[a] or any other japanese play or pantomime, may be added in
order to make a complete evening’s entertainment.


footnotes:

[a] the womans press. price 50 cents. royalty of $5.00; $2.50 to
y.w.c.a. groups.




colonial or washington’s birthday party


the guests are invited to come in colonial costumes. the host should
be dressed to represent george washington; the hostess, martha
washington. feature these two people as much as possible in the
receiving line, as leaders of the minuet and grand march, and as master
and mistress of the ceremonies throughout the evening. when it is time
for the program to begin, have george washington himself announce that
he is going to present to his guests all the various types of american
girls who live or will live in this country.

the music then swings into a plaintive indian tune and an indian girl
dressed in a striking costume of brown leather enters. she bows to
george washington, to his lady and to his guests and passes down the
center of the room and away. george washington then announces that a
puritan girl will be presented next. the music changes to “auld lang
syne,” and a lovely girl in puritan costume enters, bows shyly to
her host and passes in a demure manner down the center of the room.
a colonial girl and her escort come next. they dance the minuet for
the guests. one by one the various types of girls who have lived in
this country present themselves. the program can be made elaborate
or simple, depending upon the number of characters used. the modern
american girls may be omitted or others substituted, according to
occasion. those suggested are described below in detail. if one wishes
to add others, see the fashion review, “down petticoat lane,” published
by the womans press, from which the idea of this party has been taken.


american girls

      _character_                               _music_
  american indian girl      1500         “the chattering squaw”

striking brown indian costume, beaded and fringed; brown stockings,
leather moccasins, and beaded head-band with bright red feather at the
back. stands at opening in characteristic indian pose, head up, body
erect, arms folded across chest. comes down room with familiar indian
loping step, bows to guests and exits.

  puritan girl              1650         “auld lang syne”

simple gray puritan costume; white cap, kerchief, cuffs and apron,
white stockings and black shoes.

bows shyly to the audience, walks forward with hands demurely clasped,
makes a quaint courtesy to george washington and exits.

  colonial girl and man     1750         mozart’s minuet from “don juan”

girl in colonial costume of bright satin: tight bodice, lace kerchief,
pannier skirt; white stockings, black pumps with silver buckles;
powdered hair or wig.

gentleman in brocade or satin coat, vest, ruffled stock and frill,
knee breeches, white stockings, black pumps with colonial buckles, and
powdered wig.

they enter together, bowing to each other, then to audience, and come
to the center of the room. they dance the colonial minuet,[b] and exit
at farther end of the room.

  empire girl and partner   1800         “glow worm”

girl in high-waisted costume of empire period: short, puffed sleeves,
neck cut low off shoulders, long train; poke bonnet of satin to match
gown, either worn or carried by streamers; high-heeled satin slippers
to match gown; hair parted and done high in back with curls at each
side.

gentleman in tight-fitting satin trousers, satin coat of darker color,
brocaded vest, ruffled stock and high silk hat.

they enter and dance gavotte.

  hoopskirt girl            1850         “believe me, if all those
                                                 endearing young charms”

girl in wide, old-fashioned hoopskirt costume; tight basque, lace
kerchief, ruffled pantalettes, poke bonnet, white lace mitts and small
parasol.

gentleman in light broadcloth trousers, long-tailed coat, plain
double-breasted vest of a contrasting color, high stock, high silk hat
and burnsides.

they stroll in together. when they reach the center of the room the
music changes to jump jim crow from “maytime” by victor herbert. the
man sings the song to the girl and they dance together.[c]

  bustle girl               1875         “when johnnie comes
                                                 marching home again”

girl in old-fashioned bustle costume of silk: long full skirt with
very stiff petticoats underneath, tight bodice, leg-o’-mutton sleeves;
elaborately trimmed hat of the period, perched high on the head; black
silk mitts and parasol.

she enters with quick steps, courtesies to host and hurries down the
room.

  southern girl                          “dixie”

girl in light, ruffled dress and large floppy leghorn hat covered with
flowers. she carries a ruffled parasol and flowers in her arms.

she enters, smiling left and right, courtesies in a rather flirtatious
manner, presents a flower to her host and saunters down the room.

  western girl                           “cheyenne”

girl in short khaki riding skirt and blouse, red handkerchief around
neck, broad-brimmed western hat, high boots, belt and pistol.

she dashes in, waves hat to the audience and to host and rushes out
through audience.

  debutante and dancing partner          any popular waltz

lovely girl in dance frock; stockings and evening slippers to match.
carries a bouquet of flowers.

enters with partner as if entering a ballroom and bows to the host.
they dance some of the latest steps.

  modern gym girl                        any suitable music

girl of athletic type in gym costume of dark blue bloomers, white
middy, black tie, black stockings and white sneakers.

she carries a basket ball which she dribbles down to center of room.

  evening girl                           any popular song

tall striking-looking girl in handsome evening gown with stockings and
slippers to match; bright velvet evening wrap with handsome fur collar.
carries huge black ostrich fan.

she enters with great poise and assurance, displays her gown like a
manikin and exits down the center.

  bride and her attendants               wedding march from
                                                  “lohengrin”

beautiful girl in white satin bridal gown with long court train and
white tulle veil caught with orange blossoms. carries huge shower
bouquet of white roses and lilies-of-the-valley.

attendants in organdie dresses of pastel shades; tarlatan hats to match
gown; small nosegays of pink roses.

bridesmaids enter by twos, followed by the bride. the wedding
procession passes down the center to the end of the room, where the
bridesmaids group themselves in a semicircle around the bride. the
other performers enter and come forward to congratulate the bride. the
music changes to a march. george washington gives the bride his arm and
together they lead everyone, performers and guests, in a grand march.
at the close of the march george washington may make a little speech
to the guests, saying that he hopes everyone has enjoyed his party and
that they will come again next year to help him celebrate his birthday.


footnotes:

[b] for description of dance see “ten timely dances,” the womans press.

[c] “ten timely dances,” the womans press.




a circus party


a circus party may be made just as elaborate or just as simple as
one wishes. if one is planning to give an elaborate affair, detailed
suggestions can be found in “a circus,” published by the womans
press.[d] the following plan has been worked out to meet the demands of
those who wish to give a rather simple circus party.

a typical circus barker stands at the outer door. in professional lingo
he invites the guests to come inside. “ladies and gentlemen, right this
way, right this way! the cleverest collection of comical characters
that ever came to town! right this way, ladies and gentlemen, right
this way! nothing finer in the world! don’t fail to see it. right this
way!”

the room in which the circus is held should be decorated to look like
a circus tent, if possible. stretch a piece of old canvas across the
ceiling so that it gives the effect of a tent roof. at each end of the
room arrange booths where refreshments are served. pink lemonade and
ice-cream cones should be in one, and perhaps “hot dogs” in another.
have peanuts distributed by venders throughout the crowd. try to
arrange all sorts of side shows. display in one the freaks, such as
the armless woman, an albino, the dog-faced boy, the bearded lady, the
tallest man in the world and others of barnum and bailey fame. be sure
that there is a good barker to “ballyhoo” them and to point out the
peculiarities of each. have one or two fortune-telling booths, perhaps
a gypsy palmist and a turkish crystal gazer.

all sorts of throwing contests can be arranged to attract and amuse the
crowd. for instance, in one booth have a row of cocoanuts suspended
from the ceiling on strings. give everyone three chances at hitting a
cocoanut. if anyone succeeds he may keep the cocoanut as a prize. or
have a broken china booth where each person may take three chances at
breaking any bit of crockery he wishes.

or a game known as “hoop-la” amuses people immensely. in the center
of a roped-off ring place several prizes on small blocks of wood. the
object of this game is to ring these blocks with ordinary embroidery
hoops, which should exactly fit over the blocks. the person who throws
a hoop so that it circles the block completely, gets the prize on that
block.

or have a tub or watering trough full of water, on which small shallow
dishes are floating. the object of the game is to throw coins onto
these dishes. the money that lands in the dish is doubled and returned
to the person but any which falls in the water he loses. (of course
this game should not be played if the party is an invitation affair.)

a dart contest is always popular. tack at the back of a booth a pack
of playing cards. give each player five small wooden darts with a
sharp point in the end of each. the object of the game is to hit with
these darts three cards of the same kind, that is, three jacks or
three queens. if a player hits the three cards of the same kind in
five trials he is given a pack of playing cards as a prize. such games
always attract people, especially if at each booth there is a lively
barker who will amuse the crowd and keep things going.

to add atmosphere have all sorts of comical circus characters wander
through the audience--clowns, a rube and his wife, a big fat irish
policeman, charlie chaplin, sis hopkins and others. let them play
all sorts of tricks on each other and on the crowd. have balloon and
confetti venders everywhere, dressed in bright costumes.


the big show

of course no circus party can be complete without a big show. this also
may be made just as simple or as elaborate as one wishes. suggestions
for a few acts are briefly described. if one wishes to give a more
elaborate program, detailed directions can be found in “a circus”
mentioned above.

stage the big show in the center of the floor and have the audience
stand or sit around this ring. use the barker who stood at the entrance
as the ringmaster. in the most extravagant professional lingo he
should announce each act, pointing out its marvels. there should be a
band to help create the circus atmosphere. if a real band cannot be
had, a kazoo or a vocophone jazz band makes an excellent substitute.
vocophones are papier-mâché instruments the size and shape of regular
band instruments but made in such a way that by blowing or humming
through the mouthpiece a most melodious and voluminous sound comes
forth. they may be purchased from a. schoenhut company, hagert and
sepviva streets, philadelphia, pennsylvania, eight instruments for
twelve dollars. kazoos, small musical mouthpieces, are only a few
cents apiece. dress the musicians themselves in regular brass-buttoned
uniforms such as bandmen usually wear, or dress them as a colored
minstrel group with white duck suits, huge bright-colored ties and
blackened faces. they should lead the parade and play the piano
whenever such type of music is needed.


program

the parade.

all the performers used in the circus should enter, headed by the
ringmaster, who leads his group around the ring several times and out
through the opposite exit. first comes a jazz band followed by the
clowns, who prance from side to side tormenting the other performers
and doing all sorts of queer antics for the crowds. the freaks should
follow them, and then the wild animals, led by their animal trainer,
the acrobats, the jugglers, bareback riders and the rest of the circus
outfit. after the parade the ringmaster may detain the freaks in the
ring to display the peculiarities of each.

animals.

if you can rent or make any animal costumes, be sure to have an animal
act. it always amuses the audience if it is cleverly and realistically
done. have the ringmaster, who acts as animal trainer, put the animals
through all sorts of stunts. he should have a long whip which he snaps
vigorously as he shouts his orders. the lion and the tiger may play
ball with each other, keeping up a constant roar as they toss the ball
back and forth. the polar bear may ride a bicycle, the monkeys may have
a boxing match. the act may be ended by having all the animals dance
around on their hind legs to some lively fox-trot music.

clowns.

be sure to have a clown stunt. use all sorts of clowns, tall and short,
fat and thin. have some of them do some tumbling or pyramid stunts,
familiar to any gym instructors, and have others mimic them in a
ridiculous fashion. they may end the act with a dance.[e]

the other numbers on the program can be any special stunts that lend
themselves to circus burlesque. two others from “a circus” have been
included below to show the type of thing which is always popular at a
circus and which will not take any special time or work in preparation.


jato, the japanese juggler

judged to have the jump on all jugglers.

the act should be performed by two people who are able to put a lot
of burlesque into it and play it successfully to the gallery. jato,
the juggler, dressed in japanese kimono, balances his japanese wife on
his upturned feet. of course she merely sits on his feet, balancing
herself with the tips of her toes safely on the floor, but bowing and
smiling as though it were a most difficult stunt. then, with the aid
of an invisible wire suspended from the ceiling, jato balances such
articles as chairs and tables on his nose. he must hook them cleverly
to the loop end of the wire, as he arranges them in place, so that for
a time the audience is in ignorance of how he does the trick. finally,
jato carelessly leaves an object hanging in midair and thus discloses
his secret. his wife quickly snatches it away as he bows to the amused
audience. the old trick of lifting a supposedly heavy weight, which is
finally allowed to bounce on the floor, may be included in this act.


daisy, the daring and dazzling tight rope walker

displaying unrivaled skill and recklessness.

a tight rope stunt can be worked out by one, or even two girls,
dressed in fluffy tarlatan costumes with tight bodices and short full
skirts. stretch a rope tightly across the floor. on it the performer
makes her way across the ring, going through all the gestures and
balancing movements of a real rope walker while the orchestra plays
very melodramatic music. when she reaches the center, have the music
stop while she makes a daring turn, presumably in midair. the orchestra
starts up again with a bang. of course there is much applause from
the audience. she may even dance along the rope, finishing her stunt
with a quick pirouette turn and a dainty jump to the floor. with many
elaborate bows to the audience and to the ringmaster she leaves the
ring.

as a finale have all the performers prance around the ring several
times to lively music, throwing confetti and serpentine at the
audience. this procession will make a very gay and appropriate ending
for the big show.

be sure that everything pertaining to your evening’s entertainment is
gay, colorful and circus-like. try to have the audience and performers
catch the spirit of fun and jollity that makes a circus party go.


footnotes:

[d] “a circus,” the womans press. price 50 cents.

[e] “ten timely dances,” the womans press. price 50 cents.




an italian street scene


_note_: this is a side show or interlude in a larger entertainment
rather than a party in the usual sense of the word.

the setting is a gay, sunny italian street or corner in the market
place. across the center-back is a fruit stand piled high with
vegetables and fruits and bunches of hanging bananas. at one side is a
two-wheeled pushcart; at the other, a wooden bench. when the curtain
goes up everything suggests the happy, lazy activity of an italian
street on a bright summer day. the fat, good-natured looking fruit
dealer, in gay peasant costume, is selling vegetables to a chattering
peasant woman who carries a huge basket on her arm. a handsome italian
youth lounging on the bench is being persuaded by a pretty italian
flower girl to buy her flowers. “fiori, belli fiori, un soldo al’uno”
(flowers, flowers, one cent apiece), she urges. he feigns amused
indifference and goes on smoking his cigarette. an italian boy, sitting
on the floor against the wheel of the pushcart, is playing a harmonica,
utterly oblivious to his surroundings. an old bent-over vender, pushing
his cart across the back of the stage, cries, “tomati, potati, e
pepperone freschi” (tomatoes, potatoes and fresh peppers). two pretty
italian girls stroll by.

this action goes on in pantomime until way in the distance “o sole mio”
can be heard. the boy with his harmonica stops his playing and runs in
the direction from which the music comes. the music grows nearer and a
group of strolling italian street musicians enter. they are dressed in
the bright costumes of the troubadour type. some of them are playing
stringed instruments. the singers carry tambourines. one of the girls
in the group, who is evidently a dancer, catches sight of the handsome
italian youth and goes over toward him. two peasant girls who chance to
be passing by stop and watch her. the fruit dealer, his customer and
several other passers-by stop and listen to the music. from “o sole
mio” it changes into the well-known solo from “il trovatore,” “oh, i
have sighed to rest me,” sung by one of the men in the group. without
a pause, two others, a man and a woman, sing the duet from the same
opera, “home to our mountains.”

the crowd applauds with great enthusiasm, and the music begins again
in a gayer strain. “fickle is woman,” from “rigoletto,” is sung with
spirit. the men sing the first line, the women the next, and so on,
alternating, until the last refrain, “borne on the breezes,” which is
sung together. from that they swing into “finiculi, funicula,” which
pleases the crowd immensely. the music changes to a lively italian
dance rhythm. the dancer who has been trying to attract the attention
of the italian youth strikes her tambourine and dances a wild, spirited
dance, without taking her eyes off him. she ends the dance with several
fast turns down-stage, stopping directly in front of him. the crowds
applaud, the youth rises and together they dance the tarantella to gay
tarantella music. some of the singers and several of the onlookers join
them, dancing and singing “la peppinetta.” they dance round and round
in a glad carefree fashion, laughing and throwing flowers at each other.

the music swings back into “finiculi, funicula,” which everyone sings
and applauds wildly. the musicians collect their pennies from the crowd
and start off, singing “o sole mio,” the song with which they entered.
some of the crowd follow, others wander off. the italian youth watches
the dancer for a minute and then resumes his lazy pose on the bench.
the music grows fainter and fainter in the distance. the peasant woman
continues her bargaining with the fruit dealer. the boy takes his place
by the pushcart and goes on playing his harmonica. gradually the street
resumes its accustomed lazy atmosphere, which had been interrupted for
a moment by a group of strolling players.


la peppinetta

from “songs of italy,” collected by marzo, published by schirmer, new
york.

milan (lombardy). sung by the group or by the dancers.

  italian: che bel moffin la peppinetta!
  english: what a sweet face has peppinetta!

    corpa de dia, vui fagh l’amor!
    body o’ me, if she were only mine!

    la la  lie-ra la la la  lie-ra la la la  la la la la la la la!
      la la  lie-ra la la la  lie-ra la la la  la la la la la la  la!

    che cara tosa allegra, scetta,
    she is a dear, i cannot forget her,

    l’eona bellezza, l’èon ver te-sor!
    lively, and lovely, truly divine!

    la la  lie-ra la la la  lie-ra la la la  la la la la la la  la!
      la la  lie-ra la la la  lie-ra la la la  la la la la la la  la!

    se o-na quei volta su quel moffin,
    if any time i dare to do it,

    podess mo fagh quel che vui mi,
    what i would like to, on her face,

    mi ghe faria on bel basin,
    with a warm kiss i’ll venture to woo it,

    che no desideri de pu d’insci!
    and i shall wish no more and no less!

(repeat last two lines twice.)

    d’insci, d’insci, d’insci, d’insci!
    no less, no less, no less, no less!

    la la  lie-ra la la la  lie-ra la la  la la  la la la
      la la la la la la  lie-ra la la la  lie-ra la la la
      la la la la la la la la la  la la la la la  la la!




gypsy dance

this dance is arranged for four or more couples, a solo dancer and
her partner. to be effective it must be staged with the proper gypsy
atmosphere and the larger the group the better. have the gypsies seated
and lying around the stage in a rough circle. when the curtain rises
they are talking, laughing and humming songs. almost instantly a gypsy
man enters, dragging after him a gypsy maid, whom he throws into the
center of the circle. the captive gradually raises her head and, seeing
the curious gaze of the group around her, decides to win them by her
dancing. as the music starts and she begins to dance, some of the
gypsies in the group take up tambourines and play them in time to the
music; others sway back and forth or hum snatches of the tune.

music. danse de la gipsy, by c. saint-saëns, from the opera
“henry viii.”

  introduction. rise to standing position with hands on hips.
                                                             2 measures.

steps.

_figure 1_--16 measures.

      {starting with r foot, run 5 steps toward one group
      {  of gypsies.                                         1 measure.
  (a) {step forward on l foot, step backward on r foot and
      {  drag l foot back to r toe.                          1 measure.
      {turn and repeat whole toward another group of gypsies.
                                                             2 measures.

      {step with r foot and make half-turn toward r, count 1.
      {step with l foot and make half-turn toward r, count 2.
  (b) {step with r foot and make half-turn toward r, count 3.
      {step with l foot and make half-turn toward r, count 4.
      {hold position, standing on l foot with r foot extended
      {  at side and head flung back, looking over
      {  r shoulder, counts 5 and 6.                         1 measure.

  repeat (b) twice.                                          2 measures.

  hold final position and swing r arm in arch in front of
  body and out to r at shoulder height.                      1 measure.

repeat (a) and (b), bringing feet together at end of final measure.

_figure 2_--18 measures.

progress around circle, keeping back to center, with following step,
hands on hips.

      {step l foot diagonally across r, bending both knees.
  (a) {step r foot back and to the side, step l foot behind
      {  r, step r to the side.

  repeat 8 times.                                            3 measures.
  (b) step to r and pirouette with arms circling overhead.   1 measure.
  (c) repeat (a).                                            3 measures.

      {run 5 steps, starting l, toward one of the groups of
      {  gypsies. step forward on r foot and hold r hand
  (d) {  out as though in supplication.                      1 measure.
      {repeat 3 times, advancing toward a different group
      {  each time.                                          3 measures.

  repeat (a) for one measure.                                1 measure.

      {step l foot across r, bend l knee and extend r foot
      {  at side, then sweeping r arm across body in circle,
  (e) {  raise body to standing position with feet together.
      {                                                      1 measure.

  repeat (e).                                                1 measure.
  repeat (a) in double time.                                 3 measures.
  pirouette in center of stage with arms circling overhead
    and pose with feet together, arms stretched out overhead
    and head flung back.                                     1 measure.

_figure 3_--34 measures.

      {step r foot to side, bring l foot to r heel, change
      {weight to l foot, change weight to r foot. (this
  (a) {should be done on the toes with a slight bend in the
      {knees.)                                               1 measure.
      {repeat to l.                                          1 measure.

      {4 mazurkas, starting r.                               2 measures.
      {  mazurka: slide r foot diagonally forward r;
      {    bring l foot up to r heel and step on it, raising
      {    r knee high with r foot pointing down at l
  (b) {    knee.
      {step forward r and hold with l foot at r heel,
      {  counts 1 and 2.
      {step back on l foot, count 3. drag l foot back to
      {  position in front of r toe and then place weight on
      {  l foot, counts 4, 5, 6.                             1 measure.

  step back l, dragging r foot to position. {                1 measure.
  step back l, dragging r foot to position. {

      {pirouette l, hands circling over head, and hold pose,
      {  standing with weight on l foot, l hand on hip and
      {  r arm extended over head.                           1 measure.
      {  (an experienced dancer may substitute a leap-turn
  (c) {    for the pirouette.)
      {pirouette r and pose.                                 1 measure.
      {pirouette l and pose, swinging r arm across body
      {  and back to position over head.                     2 measures.
      {repeat (b) through (c) three times.                  24 measures.

_figure 4_--12 measures.

      {hold final position of figure 3 for 2 counts, then drop
      {  on r knee, with body and head turned toward r and
      {  bent over r knee and l leg extended straight out
  (a) {  behind. l arm swung back following line of l leg,
      {  count 3. rise to standing position through 3 counts
      {  of music, swinging r arm forward and over head.     1 measure.
      {repeat to l.                                          1 measure.

      {hold 2 counts in standing position, replacing hand on
      {  hip.
      {with 5 two-steps forward, starting r, progress in a
  (b) {  small circle around stage.
      {  note: the two-steps should be done with the knees
      {    slightly bent and a swaying motion from side to
      {    side.                                             2 measures.

  repeat (a) and (b).                                        4 measures.

      {step r and pirouette, 2 counts.
      {with 20 large steps, starting r, run around circle,
  (c) {  keeping back to center.
      {step r in center of stage and pirouette, ending with
      {  arms stretched out over head, and head flung back,  4 measures.

_figure 5_--22 measures.

four couples jump up from the group and take places in four corners of
a square around the solo dancer. man joins solo dancer as her partner
for this step. this action must be spontaneous, as though the solo
dancer had excited the rest so that they could no longer keep still.

the girls stand with their backs to the center of the circle. the
weight is on the l foot and the r foot is extended toward partner. the
r hand clasps partner’s r hand, the l arm is flung straight up over
head.

the men stand facing the center of the circle in the same position as
the girls.

the solo dancer and her partner take the same position as the rest of
the group, standing in the center of the stage.

  hold position for 2 counts, then, swinging l arm down at
  side and keeping r hands joined, exchange places with
  partner with 4 running steps, starting r.                  1 measure.

  repeat back to place.                                      1 measure.

  hold original position for 2 counts, then, placing hands
  on hips, with 5 two-steps, starting r, each girl advances
  toward the man in the couple on her l, each man advances
  toward girl in the couple on his l, while the central
  dancers dance around each other.                           2 measures.

  take both hands of new partner and with feet together and
  bodies stretched away from partner, heads flung back, swing
  partner around in place.                                   4 measures.

  repeat whole, using two-steps to return to original partner.
                                                             8 measures.

  men stand in place facing center of stage, with arms folded
  and held high, watching the girls dancing around them.

  girls with hands on hips dance around partners with 11 waltz
  steps, starting r, and a pirouette l in front of partner.  4 measures.

  girl pirouettes r in front of man, who holds position, then
  man takes girl’s l hand in his l hand and lets her fall back
  over his r arm, while she supports herself with her r foot
  on the ground, her r knee bent and her l leg extended in the
  air.                                                       2 measures.

as music ends, all exeunt laughing, singing and striking tambourines.


costumes

girls: short, bright-colored skirts and blouses; bare legs; scarfs tied
over the head; beads, earrings, bracelets, etc.

men: long dark trousers, bright-colored shirts, and scarfs tied around
the hips.




a christmas service


time. christmas eve.

place. a dimly lighted hall or church.

persons in the tableau.

    the three wise men
    a shepherd
    an angel
    mary, joseph and the child
    a group of singers in choir robes

the setting. a dark curtain background.

the audience is seated in a dimly lighted hall, at the windows of
which long christmas tapers are burning. when everything is still,
far outside in the distance “adeste fideles” is heard. the song comes
nearer. a group of singers dressed in choir robes enter and pass up
the center aisle, singing in a glad, spirited fashion.

    o come, all ye faithful, joyful and triumphant,
    o come ye, o come ye to bethlehem;
    come and behold him born the king of angels;
    o come, let us adore him,
    o come, let us adore him,
    o come, let us adore him, christ the lord.

they group themselves in a semicircle in front of the stage, kneeling
as they sing the “amen.” the lighted tapers which they carry throw a
lively, warm light on their young faces.

the curtains part, revealing the tableau of the three wise men, their
gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh. they enter from the right and
slowly move across the stage toward a great light, singing.


_tune: traditional melody_

    we three kings of orient are,
    bearing gifts, we wander afar
    field and fountain, moor and mountain,
    following yonder star.

the singers down in front sing the chorus:

    o star of wonder, star of might,
    star with royal beauty bright,
    westward leading, still proceeding,
    guide us to thy perfect light.

the king bearing gold sings:

    born a king on bethlehem plain,
    gold i bring to crown him again,
    king for ever, ceasing never
    over us all to reign.

the chorus chants:

    “o star of wonder” etc.

the king bearing frankincense, sings:

    frankincense to offer have i;
    incense owns a deity nigh;
    prayer and praising all men raising,
    worship him, god on high.

chorus chants the refrain:

    “o star of wonder” etc.

the king bearing myrrh sings:

    myrrh is mine; its bitter perfume
    breathes a life of gathering gloom:
    sorrowing, sighing, bleeding, dying,
    sealed in the stone-cold tomb.

the chorus chants:

    “o star of wonder” etc.

all three kings sing:

    glorious now behold him arise,
    king and god and sacrifice;
    heaven sings alleluia;
    alleluia, the earth replies.

the chorus chants the refrain and the three wise men go off to the left
in the direction from which the light came. the curtains close and
choir sings:


_tune: carol, by r. s. willis_

    it came upon the midnight clear,
    that glorious song of old,
    from angels bending near the earth
    to touch their harps of gold.
    “peace on the earth, good-will to men,
    from heaven’s all-gracious king,”
    the world in solemn stillness lay,
    to hear the angels sing.

they swing from the “amen” of this hymn to another old familiar one,
“while shepherds watched their flocks by night.” the curtain rises,
revealing the tableau of the shepherds. the persons in the picture
pantomime the action as the chorus sings the words.

    while shepherds watched their flocks by night,
    all seated on the ground,
    an angel of the lord came down
    and glory shone around.
    and glory shone around.

    fear not, said he, for trembling dread
    had seized their troubled minds,
    good tidings of great joy i bring
    to you and all mankind.
    to you and all mankind.

    to you in david’s town this day
    is born of david’s line,
    a savior who is christ the lord
    and this shall be the sign.
    and this shall be the sign.

the curtains close on the “amen.” the chorus sings:


_tune: old traditional german melody._

    silent night, holy night,
    darkness flies, all is light,
    shepherds hear the angels sing
    alleluia, hail the king,
    christ, the saviour is here,
    jesus, the saviour is here!

    silent night, holy night,
    guiding star, lend thy light!
    with the angels let us sing
    alleluia to our king,
    christ, the saviour is here,
    jesus, the saviour is here!

after the “amen” the chorus sings “sleep, holy child,” as the curtain
rises on the tableau of the nativity.

_english version by frederick h. martens; tune: old french noël,
arranged by herbert tones._

    lying around the oxen mild,
    sleep, sleep, sleep, o holy child!
    round thee as they wing,
    guardian angels sing,
    homage pay to thee,
    to infant love’s sweet king.
    sleep, sleep, sleep, o holy child!

    2nd. roses and lilies round thee piled, etc.

    3rd. dreams by the shepherds’ song beguiled.

the curtain closes as the chorus chants with bowed head the “amen.” the
singers rise and turning toward the audience sing “joy to the world.”


_tune: antioch._

    joy to the world! the lord is come,
    let earth receive her king,
    let every heart prepare him room,
    and heaven and nature sing,
    and heaven and nature sing,
    and heaven, and heaven and nature sing.

    he rules the world with truth and grace.
    and makes the nations prove
    the glories of his righteousness
    and wonders of his love,
    and wonders of his love,
    and wonders, and wonders of his love.

the music changes to the same processional to which they entered. the
chorus, with lighted tapers held high, pass down the aisle and away,
singing as they go.


_adeste fideles._

    yea, lord, we greet thee, born this happy morning,
    jesus, to thee be all glory given:
    word of the father, now in flesh appearing:
    o come, let us adore him,
    o come, let us adore him,
    o come let us adore him, christ the lord.

the “amen” is heard way in the distance. the tableau is ended.


setting

across the width of the stage is a dark curtain which hangs in deep
folds. it opens in the center on a space wide and deep enough to stage
each of the three pictures. across the back of this space there should
be a dark, midnight-blue, starry background against which each picture
is set.


description of the pictures

the three wise men

the first picture is of the three wise men on their way to bethlehem.
they are dressed in oriental robes and turbans. the first carries a
pot of gold; the second, a jeweled casket filled with frankincense;
the third, an incense holder filled with myrrh. as the curtains part,
they enter from the right. their gaze is fixed on a great light which
streams from off-stage, left, on their upturned faces. they move slowly
across the stage and toward the light as they sing “we three kings of
orient are.”

the angel and the shepherds

the second picture is of the shepherds watching their flocks by night.
when the curtains part, two shepherds are seated at the right of the
picture, half reclining against a rock. at their feet another lies
asleep. a little to the left-center of the picture, two others are
stretched on the ground. suddenly there is a great light off-stage, at
the left, and an angel robed in white appears from the direction in
which the light comes. the shepherds sink back in fear and awe. the
angel raises her left hand in token of peace, and turning toward the
light, points with her right hand toward bethlehem, where the christ is
born. the shepherds gaze a moment and then start to rise and follow, as
the angel moves away in the direction of the light.

the nativity

the last picture is the nativity of the manger. in the center sits mary
bending over the christ child. behind her stands joseph. kneeling in
front of her and a little to her left are the three wise men, to her
right the same shepherds to whom the angel appeared. the wise man at
the extreme right of the picture stands with bowed head; the other two,
at his left, kneel, one with outstretched hands, the other with head
and shoulders bent low. at the extreme left of the picture a stalwart
shepherd leans upon his staff, his gaze fixed in wonder upon the child.
at his right, one companion kneels; the others are prostrated on the
ground. all the light in the picture seems to radiate from the child,
casting a beautiful radiance on the face of the virgin. the figures
stand immovable, wrapped in worshipful awe, as the choir sings “sleep,
holy child.”




transcriber’s note

perceived typographical errors have been changed.





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook ten recreational parties ***


    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™

project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.

the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.

﻿the project gutenberg ebook of is 5
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: is 5

author: e. e. cummings

release date: october 10, 2025 [ebook #77021]

language: english

original publication: new york: boni & liveright, 1926

credits: carla foust, hannah wilson and the online distributed proofreading team at https://www.pgdp.net (this book was produced from scanned images of public domain material from the google books project.)


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook is 5 ***





  of this book

  there is also
  a special limited edition
  consisting of seventy-seven
  copies on special paper
  specially bound
  numbered
  and
  autographed
  of which seventy copies are for sale




is five




five books

by e. e. cummings


  1. the enormous room
  2. tulips and chimneys
  3. &
  4. xli poems
  5. is five        ¶




  by e. e. cummings

  is

  [illustration: 5]


  new york
  boni & liveright
  1926




  copyright, 1926, by boni & liveright

  all rights reserved


  printed by samuel aiwaz jacobs

  at the polytype press

  new york




foreword


on the assumption that my technique is either complicated or original
or both, the publishers have politely requested me to write an
introduction to this book.

at least my theory of technique, if i have one, is very far from
original; nor is it complicated. i can express it in fifteen words,
by quoting the eternal question and immortal answer of burlesk, viz.
“would you hit a woman with a child?--no, i’d hit her with a brick.”
like the burlesk comedian, i am abnormally fond of that precision which
creates movement.

if a poet is anybody, he is somebody to whom things made matter very
little--somebody who is obsessed by making. like all obsessions, the
making obsession has disadvantages; for instance, my only interest in
making money would be to make it. fortunately, however, i should prefer
to make almost anything else, including locomotives and roses. it is
with roses and locomotives (not to mention acrobats spring electricity
coney island the 4th of july the eyes of mice and niagara falls) that
my “poems” are competing.

they are also competing with each other, with elephants, and with el
greco.

ineluctable preoccupation with the verb gives a poet one priceless
advantage: whereas nonmakers must content themselves with the merely
undeniable fact that two times two is four, he rejoices in a purely
irresistible truth (to be found, in abbreviated costume, upon the title
page of the present volume.)

                                          e. e. cummings.




  a list of where
  these poems

  have been published

*


  england france italy
  austria and
  america

*




title is v


  foreword vii

  one i-xl 1-55

  two i-xi 57-72

  three i-x 73-86

  four i-xviii 87-107

  five i-v 109-115




one




i

five americans


i. liz

    with breathing as (faithfully) her lownecked
    dress a little topples and slightly expands

    one square foot mired in silk wrinkling loth
    stocking begins queerly to do a few
    gestures to death,
                      the silent shoulders are both
    slowly with pinkish ponderous arms bedecked
    whose white thick wrists deliver promptly to
    a deep lap enormous mindless hands.
    and no one knows what (i am sure of this)
    her blunt unslender, what her big unkeen

    “business is rotten” the face yawning said

    what her mouth thinks of
                            (if it were a kiss
    distinct entirely melting sinuous lean . . .
    whereof this lady in some book had read


ii. mame

    she puts down the handmirror. “look at” arranging
    before me a mellifluous idiot grin
    (with what was nose upwrinkled into nothing
    earthly, while the slippery eyes drown
    in surging flesh). a thumblike index down-
    dragging yanks back skin “see” (i, seeing, ceased
    to breathe). the plump left fist opening
    “wisdom.” flicker of gold. “yep. no gas. flynn”

    the words drizzle untidily from released
    cheeks “i’ll tell duh woild; some noive all right.
    aint much on looks but how dat baby ached.”

    and when i timidly hinted “novocaine?”
    the eyes outstart, curl, bloat, are newly baked

    and swaggering cookies of indignant light


iii. gert

    joggle i think will do it although the glad
    monosyllable jounce possibly can tell
    better how the balloons move (as
    her ghost lurks, a beau brummel sticking in its three-

    cornered always moist mouth)--jazz,
    for whose twitching lips, between you and me
    almost succeeds while toddle rings the bell.
    but if her tall corpsecoloured body seat
    itself (with the uncouth habitual dull
    jerk at garters) there’s no sharpest neat
    word for the thing.
                        her voice?
                                  gruesome:a trull
    leaps from the lungs “gimme uh swell fite

    like up ter yknow, rektuz, toysday nite;
    where uh guy gets gayn troze uh lobstersalad


iv. marj

    “life?
          listen” the feline she with radishred
    legs said (crossing them slowly)“i’m
    asleep. yep. youse is asleep kid
    and everybody is.” and i hazarded
    “god” (blushing slightly)--“o damn
    ginks like dis gawd” opening slowlyslowly
    them--then carefully the rolypoly
    voice squatting on a mountain of gum did
    something like a whisper, “even her.”
    “the madam?” i emitted; vaguely watching
    that mountainous worthy in the fragile act
    of doing her eyebrows.--marj’s laughter smacked
    me: pummeling the curtains, drooped to a purr . . .

    i left her permanently smiling


v. fran

    should i entirely ask of god why
    on the alert neck of this brittle whore
    delicately wobbles an improbably distinct face,
    and how these wooden big two feet conclude
    happeningly the unfirm drooping bloated
    calves
          i would receive the answer more
    or less deserved, young fellow go in peace.
    which i do, being as dick mid once noted
    lifting a green river (here’s to youse)
    “a bloke wot’s well behaved” . . . and always try
    to not wonder how let’s say elation
    causes the bent eyes thickly to protrude--

    or why her tiniest whispered invitation
    is like a clock striking in a dark house




ii

poem, or beauty hurts mr. vinal


    take it from me kiddo
    believe me
    my country, ’tis of

    you, land of the cluett
    shirt boston garter and spearmint
    girl with the wrigley eyes(of you
    land of the arrow ide
    and earl &
    wilson
    collars)of you i
    sing:land of abraham lincoln and lydia e. pinkham,
    land above all of just add hot water and serve--
    from every b. v. d.

    let freedom ring

    amen. i do however protest, anent the un
    -spontaneous and otherwise scented merde which
    greets one (everywhere why) as divine poesy per
    that and this radically defunct periodical. i would

    suggest that certain ideas gestures
    rhymes, like gillette razor blades
    having been used and reused
    to the mystical moment of dullness emphatically are
    not to be resharpened. (case in point

    if we are to believe these gently o sweetly
    melancholy trillers amid the thrillers
    these crepuscular violinists among my and your
    skyscrapers--helen&cleopatra were just too lovely,
    the snail’s on the thorn enter morn and god’s
    in his andsoforth

    do you get me? (according
    to such supposedly indigenous
    throstles art is o world o life
    a formula:example, turn your shirttails into
    drawers and if it isn’t an eastman it isn’t a
    kodak therefore my friends let
    us now sing each and all fortissimo a-
    mer
    i

    ca, i
    love,
    you. and there’re a
    hun-dred-mil-lion-oth-ers, like
    all of you successfully if
    delicately gelded(or spaded)
    gentlemen(and ladies)--pretty

    littleliverpill-
    hearted-nujolneeding-there’s-a-reason
    americans(who tensetendoned and with
    upward vacant eyes, painfully
    perpetually crouched, quivering, upon the
    sternly allotted sandpile
    --how silently
    emit a tiny violetflavoured nuisance:odor?

    ono.
    comes out like a ribbon lies flat on the brush




iii


    curtains part)
    the peacockappareled
    prodigy of flo’’s midnight
    frolic dolores

    small in the head keen chassised like a rolls
    royce
    swoops smoothly
                    outward(amid
    tinkling-cheering-hammering

    tables)

    while softly along kirkland street
    the infantile ghost of professor
    royce rolls

    remembering that it

    has for
    -gotten some-
    thing ah

    (my

    necktie




iv


    workingman with hand so hairy-sturdy
    you may turn o turn that airy hurdysturdygurdy
    but when will turn backward o backward time in your no thy flight
    and make me a child, a pretty dribbling child, a little child.

    in thy your ear:
    en amerique on ne boit que de jingyale.
    things are going rather kaka
    over there, over there.
    yet we scarcely fare much better--

    what’s become of (if you please)
    all the glory that or which was greece
    all the grandja
    that was dada?

    make me a child, stout hurdysturdygurdyman
    waiter, make me a child. so this is paris.
    i will sit in the corner and drink thinks and think drinks,
    in memory of the grand and old days:
    of amy sandburg
    of algernon carl swinburned.

    waiter a drink waiter two or three drinks
    what’s become of mæterlink
    now that april’s here?
    (ask the man who owns one
    ask dad, he knows).




v


    yonder deadfromtheneckup graduate of a
    somewhat obscure to be sure university spends
    her time looking picturesque under

    the as it happens quite
    erroneous impression that he

    nascitur




vi


    jimmie’s got a goil
                       goil
                           goil,
                                jimmie
    ’s got a goil and
    she coitnly can shimmie

    when you see her shake
                          shake
                               shake,
                                     when
    you see her shake a
    shimmie how you wish that you was jimmie.

    oh for such a gurl
                      gurl
                          gurl,
                               oh
    for such a gurl to
    be a fellow’s twistandtwirl

    talk about your sal-
                        sal-
                            sal-,
                                 talk
    about your salo
    -mes but gimmie jimmie’s gal.




vii


    the waddling
    madam star
    taps
    taps.   “ready girls”.   the

    unspontaneous streets
    make bright their eyes
    a
    blind irisher fiddles a

    scotch jig in a stinking
    joyman bar
    a cockney is
    buying whiskies for a turk

    a waiter intones:bloo-moo-n
    sirkusricky
    platzburg
    hoppytoad       yesmam.      the

    furious taximan
    p(ee)ps
    on his whistle somebody
    says here’s luck

    somebody else says down the hatch
    the nigger smiles
    the jew stands
    besides his teddy-bears

    the sailor shuffles the
    night with φυκινγ eyes
    the great black preacher gargles jesus
    the aesthete indulges

    his soul for certain things which died
    it is eighteen hundred
    years. . . .
    exactly

      under the window
      under the window
      under the window walk

    the unburied feet of
    the little ladies more than dead




viii


    listen my children and you
    shall hear the true

    story of mr do
    -nothing the wellknown parvenu
    who

    (having dreamed of a corkscrew)
    studied with freud a year or two
    and when freud got through
    with do-

    nothing do
    -nothing could do
    nothing which you
    and i are accustomed to
    accomplish two

    or three times, and even a few
    more depending on the remu-
    nerativeness of the stimulus(eheu
    fu
    -gaces postu-
    me boo

    who)




ix


    even if all desires things moments be
    murdered known photographed,ourselves yawning will ask ourselves
    ou sont les neiges. . . . some

    guys talks big

    about lundun burlin an gay paree an
    some guys claims der never was
    nutn like nooer leans shikahgo sain
    looey noo york an san fran dictaphones
    wireless subways vacuum
    cleaners pianolas funnygraphs skyscrapers an safetyrazors

    sall right in its way kiddo
    but as fer i gimme de good ole daze. . . .

    in dem daze kid christmas
    meant sumpn youse knows wot
    i refers ter satter nailyuh(comes but once er
    year)i’ll tell de woild one swell bangup
    time wen nobody wore no cloze
    an went runnin aroun wid eachudder hell
    bent fer election makin believe dey was chust born




x


    death is more than
    certain a hundred these
    sounds crowds odours it
    is in a hurry
    beyond that any this
    taxi smile or angle we do

    not sell and buy
    things so necessary as
    is death and unlike shirts
    neckties trousers
    we cannot wear it out

    no sir which is why
    granted who discovered
    america ether the movies
    may claim general importance

    to me to you nothing is
    what particularly
    matters hence in a

    little sunlight and less
    moonlight ourselves against the worms

    hate laugh shimmy




xi


    nobody loses all the time

    i had an uncle named
    sol who was a born failure and
    nearly everybody said he should have gone
    into vaudeville perhaps because my uncle sol could
    sing mccann he was a diver on xmas eve like hell itself which
    may or may not account for the fact that my uncle

    sol indulged in that possibly most inexcusable
    of all to use a highfalootin phrase
    luxuries that is or to
    wit farming and be
    it needlessly
    added

    my uncle sol’s farm
    failed because the chickens
    ate the vegetables so
    my uncle sol had a
    chicken farm till the
    skunks ate the chickens when

    my uncle sol
    had a skunk farm but
    the skunks caught cold and
    died and so
    my uncle sol imitated the
    skunks in a subtle manner

    or by drowning himself in the watertank
    but somebody who’d given my uncle sol a victor
    victrola and records while he lived presented to
    him upon the auspicious occasion of his decease a
    scrumptious not to mention splendiferous funeral with
    tall boys in black gloves and flowers and everything and

    i remember we all cried like the missouri
    when my uncle sol’s coffin lurched because
    somebody pressed a button
    (and down went
    my uncle
    sol

    and started a worm farm)




xii


    now dis “daughter” uv eve(who aint precisely slim )sim

    ply don’t know duh meanin uv duh woid sin in
    not disagreeable contras tuh dat not exacly fat

    “father”(adjustin his robe)who now puts on his flat hat




xiii


    (and i imagine
    never mind joe agreeably cheerfully remarked when
    surrounded by fat stupid animals
    the jewess shrieked
    the messiah tumbled successfully into the world
    the animals continued eating. and i imagine she, and
    heard them slobber and
    in the darkness)

    stood sharp angels with faces like jim europe




xiv


    it really must
    be nice, never to

    have no imagination)or never
    never to wonder about guys you used to(and them
    slim hot queens with dam next to nothing

    on)tangoing
    (while a feller tries
    to hold down the fifty bucks per
    job with one foot and rock a

    cradle with the other)it must be
    nice never to have no doubts about why you
    put the ring
    on(and watching her
    face grow old and tired to which

    you’re married and hands get red washing
    things and dishes)and to never, never really wonder i
    mean about the smell
    of babies and how you

    know the dam rent’s going to and everything and never, never
    never to stand at no window
    because i can’t sleep(smoking sawdust

    cigarettes in the
    middle of the night




xv

item


    this man is o so
    waiter
    this;woman is

    please shut that
    the pout and affectionate leer
    interminable pyramidal,napkins
    (this man is oh so tired of this
    a door opens by itself
    woman.) they so to speak were in

    love once?
    now
        her mouth opens too far
    and:she attacks her lobster without
    feet mingle under the
    mercy.
          (exit the hors d’œures)




xvi


    it started when bill’s chip let on to
    the bulls he’d bumped a bloke back in fifteen.
    then she came toward him on her knees across the locked
    room. he knocked her cold and beat it for chicago.

    eddie was waiting for him, and they cleaned up a few
    times--before she got the info
    from a broad that knew eddie in topeka, went clean
    daffy, and which was very silly hocked

    the diamond he gave her. bill was put wise
    that she was coming with his kid inside her.
    he laughed. she came. he gave her a shove
    and asked eddie did he care to ride her?
    . . . .she exactly lay, looking hunks of love

    in the chair he kept talking about eyes




xvii


    ikey(goldberg)’s worth i’m
    told $ several million
    finklestein(fritz)lives
    at the ritz wear
    earl & wilson collars




xviii

?


    why are these pipples taking their hets off?
    the king & queen
    alighting from their limousine
    inhabit the hotel meurice (whereas
    i live in a garret and eat aspirine)

    but who is this pale softish almost round
    young man to whom headwaiters bow so?
    hush--the author of women by night whose latest seeds
    of evil sold 69 carloads before
    publication the girl who goes wrong you

    know(whereas when i lie down i cough too
    much). how did the traffic get so jammed?
    bedad it is the famous doctor who inserts
    monkeyglands in millionaires a cute idea n’est-ce pas?
    (whereas, upon the other hand, myself)but let us next demand

    wherefore yon mob
    an accident? somebody got concus-
    sion of the brain?--not
    a bit of it, my dears merely the prime
    minister of siam in native

    costume, who
    emerging from a pissoir
    enters abruptly notre dame(whereas
    de gustibus non disputandum est
    my lady is tired of that sort of thing




xix


    this young question mark man

    question mark
    who suffers from
    indigestion question
    mark is a remarkably
    charming person

    personally they tell

    me as for me
    i only knows that
    as far as
    his pictures goes

    he’s a wet dream

    by cézanne




xx


    mr youse needn’t be so spry
    concernin questions arty

    each has his tastes but as for i
    i likes a certain party

    gimme the he-man’s solid bliss
    for youse ideas i’ll match youse

    a pretty girl who naked is
    is worth a million statues




xxi


i was sitting in mcsorley’s. outside it was new york and beautifully
snowing.

inside snug and evil. the slobbering walls filthily push witless
creases of screaming warmth chuck pil- lows are noise funnily swallows
swallowing revolv- ingly pompous a the swallowed mottle with smooth or
a but of rapidly goes gobs the and of flecks of and a chatter sobbings
intersect with which distinct disks of graceful oath, upsoarings the
break on ceiling- flatness

the bar.tinking luscious jigs dint of ripe silver with warmlyish
wetflat splurging smells waltz the glush of squirting taps plus slush
of foam knocked off and a faint piddle-of-drops she says i ploc spittle
what the lands thaz me kid in no sir hopping sawdust you kiddo he’s a
palping wreaths of badly yep cigars who jim him why gluey grins topple
together eyes pout gestures stickily point made glints squinting who’s
a wink bum-nothing and money fuzzily mouths take big wobbly foot-steps
every goggle cent of it get out ears dribbles soft right old feller
belch the chap hic sum- more eh chuckles skulch. . . .

and i was sitting in the din thinking drinking the ale, which never
lets you grow old blinking at the low ceiling my being pleasantly was
punctuated by the al- ways retchings of a worthless lamp.

when with a minute terrif iceffortone dirty squeal of soiling light
yanking from bushy obscurity a bald greenish foetal head established it
suddenly upon the huge neck around whose unwashed sonorous muscle the
filth of a collar hung gently.

(spattered)by this instant of semiluminous nausea a vast
wordless nondescript genie of trunk trickled firm- ly in to one
exactly-mutilated ghost of a chair,

a;domeshaped interval of complete plasticity,shoul- ders,sprouted the
extraordinary arms through an an- gle of ridiculous velocity commenting
upon an un- clean table.and,whose distended immense both paws slowly
loved a dinted mug

gone darkness it was so near to me, i ask of shad- ow won’t you have a
drink?

(the eternal perpetual question)

inside snugandevil. i was sitting in mcsorley’s it,did not answer.

outside.(it was new york and beautifully,snowing. . . .




xxii


    she being brand

    -new;and you
    know consequently a
    little stiff i was
    careful of her and(having

    thoroughly oiled the universal
    joint tested my gas felt of
    her radiator made sure her springs were o.

    k.)i went right to it flooded-the-carburetor cranked her

    up,slipped the
    clutch(and then somehow got into reverse she
    kicked what
    the hell)next
    minute i was back in neutral tried and

    again slo-wly;bare,ly nudg.   ing(my

    lev-er right-
    oh and her gears being in
    a 1 shape passed
    from low through
    second-in-to-high like
    greasedlightning justas we turned the corner ofdivinity

    avenue i touched the accelerator and give

    her the juice,good

                      (it

    was the first ride and believe i we was
    happy to see how nice she acted right up to
    the last minute coming back down by the public
    gardens i slammed on
    the

    internalexpanding
    &
    externalcontracting
    brakes bothatonce and

    brought allofher tremb
    -ling
    to a:dead.

    stand-
    ;still)




xxiii


    slightly before the middle of congressman pudd
    ’s 4th of july oration, with a curse and a frown
    amy lowell got up
    and all the little schoolchildren sat down




xxiv


    dick mid’s large bluish face without eyebrows

    sits in the kitchen nights and chews a two-bit
    cigar
          waiting for the bulls to pull his joint.
    jimmie was a dude. dark hair and nice hands.

    with a little eye that rolled and made its point

    jimmie’s sister worked for dick. and had some rows
    over percent. the gang got shot up twice, it
    operated in the hundred ands

    all the chips would kid jimmie to give them a kiss
    but jimmie lived regular. stewed three times a week.
    and slept twice a week with a big toothless girl
    in yonkers.
                dick mid’s green large three teeth leak

    smoke:remembering, two pink big lips curl. . . .

    how jimmie was framed and got his




xxv

ode


    o
    the sweet & aged people
    who rule this world(and me and
    you if we’re not very
    careful)

    o,
    the darling benevolent mindless
    he--and she--
    shaped waxworks filled
    with dead ideas(the oh

    quintillions of incredible
    dodderingly godly toothless
    always-so-much-interested-
    in-everybody-else’s-business

    bipeds)oh
    the bothering
    dear unnecessary hairless
    o
    ld




xxvi


    on the madam’s best april the
    twenty nellie

    anyway and
    it’s flutters everything
    queer;does smells he smiles is
    like out of doors he’s a with
    eyes and making twice the a week
    you kind of,know(kind well of
    a sort of the way he smile but
    and her a i mean me a
    irish,cook but well oh don’t
    you makes burst want to dear somehow
    quickyes when(now,dark dear oh)
    the iceman
    how,luminously
    oh how listens and,expands
    my somewherealloverme heart my
    the halfgloom coolish
    of the what are
    parks for wiggle yes has
    are leap,which,anyway

    give rapid lapfulls of
    idiotic big hands




xxvii


    (as that named fred
    -somebody:hippopotamus, scratch-
    ing,one,knee with,its,
    friend observes i

    pass mr tom larsen twirls among

    pale lips the extinct
    cigar)at

    which

    this(once flinger
    of lariats lean exroper of
    horned suddenly crashing things)man spits

    quickly into the very bright spittoon




xxviii


    my uncle
    daniel fought in the civil
    war band and can play the triangle
    like the devil)my

    uncle frank has done nothing for many
    years but fly kites and
    when the
    string breaks(or something)my uncle frank breaks into
    tears.  my uncle tom

    knits and is a kewpie above the ears(but

    my uncle ed
    that’s
    dead from the neck

    up is lead all over
    brattle street by a castrated pup




xxix


    than(by yon sunset’s wintry glow
    revealed)this tall strong stalwart youth,
    what sight shall human optics know
    more quite ennobling forsooth?

    one wondrous fine sonofabitch
    (to all purposes and intents)
    in which distinct and rich
    portrait should be included,gents

    these(by the fire’s ruddy glow
    united)not less than sixteen
    children and of course you know
    their mother,of his heart the queen

    --incalculable bliss!
    picture it gents:our hero,dan
    who as you’ve guessed already is
    the poorbuthonest workingman

    (by that bright flame whose myriad tints
    enrich a visage simple,terse,
    seated like any king or prince
    upon his uncorrupted arse

    with all his hearty soul aglow)
    his nightly supper sups
    it isn’t snowing snow you know
    it’s snowing buttercups




xxx


    weazened irrefutable unastonished
    two,countenances seated in arranging;sunlight
    with-ered unspea-king:twenty,f i n g e r s, large
    four gnarled lips totter

    therefore,approaching my twentysix selves
    bulging in immortal spring express a cry of
    how do you find the sun,ladies?

    (graduallyverygradually “there is not enough
    of it” their,hands
    minutely

    answered




xxxi

memorabilia


    stop look &

    listen venezia: incline thine
    ear you glassworks
    of murano;
    pause
    elevator nel
    mezzo del cammin’ that means half-
    way up the campanile, believe

    thou me cocodrillo--

    mine eyes have seen
    the glory of

    the coming of
    the americans particularly the
    brand of marriageable nymph which is
    armed with large legs rancid
    voices baedekers mothers and kodaks
    --by night upon the riva schiavoni or in
    the felicitous vicinity of the de l’europe

    grand and royal
    danielli their numbers

    are like unto the stars of heaven. . . .

    i do signore
    affirm that all gondola signore
    day below me gondola signore gondola
    and above me pass loudly and gondola
    rapidly denizens of omaha altoona or what
    not enthusiastic cohorts from duluth god only,
    gondola knows cincingondolanati i gondola don’t

    --the substantial dollarbringing virgins

    “from the loggia where
    are we angels by o yes
    beautiful we now pass through the look
    girls in the style of that’s the
    foliage what is it didn’t ruskin
    says about you got the haven’t marjorie
    isn’t this wellcurb simply darling”
                                        --o education:o

    thos cook & son

    (o to be a metope
    now that triglyph’s here)




xxxii


    a man who had fallen among thieves
    lay by the roadside on his back
    dressed in fifteenthrate ideas
    wearing a round jeer for a hat

    fate per a somewhat more than less
    emancipated evening
    had in return for consciousness
    endowed him with a changeless grin

    where a dozen staunch and leal
    citizens did graze at pause
    then fired by hypercivic zeal
    sought newer pastures or because

    swaddled with a frozen brook
    of pinkest vomit out of eyes
    which noticed nobody he looked
    as if he did not care to rise

    one hand did nothing on the vest
    its wideflung friend clenched weakly dirt
    while the mute trouserfly confessed
    a button solemnly inert.

    brushing from whom the stiffened puke
    i put him all into my arms
    and staggered banged with terror through
    a million billion trillion stars




xxxiii


    babylon slim
    -ness of
    evenslicing
    eyes are chisels

    scarlet goes
    with her
    whitehot
    face,gashed

    by hair’s blue cold

    jolts of
    lovecrazed abrupt

    flesh split “pretty
    baby”
    to
    numb rhythm before christ




xxxiv


    this evangelist
    buttons with his big gollywog voice
    the kingdomofheaven up behind and crazily
    skating thither and hither in filthy sawdust
    chucks and rolls
    against the tent his thick joggling fists

    he is persuasive

    the editor cigarstinking hobgoblin swims
    upward in hisswivelchair one fist dangling scandal while
    rapidly through mist a defunct king as

    linotypes gobblehobble

    our lightheavy twic twoc ingly attacks
    landing a onetwo
    which doubles up suddenly his bunged hinging
    victim against the
    giving ropes amid
    screams of deeply bulging thousands

    i too omit one kelly

    in response to howjedooze the candidate’s new silk
    lid bounds gently from his baldness
    a smile masturbates softly in the vacant
    lot of his physiognomy
    his scientifically pressed trousers ejaculate spats

    a strikingly succulent getup

    but
    we knew a muffhunter and he said to us kid.
    daze nutn like it.




xxxv


    (ponder,darling,these busted statues
    of yon motheaten forum be aware
    notice what hath remained
    --the stone cringes
    clinging to the stone,how obsolete

    lips utter their extant smile. . . .
    remark

    a few deleted of texture
    or meaning monuments and dolls

    resist them greediest paws of careful
    time all of which is extremely
    unimportant)whereas life

    matters if or

    when the your- and my-
    idle vertical worthless
    self unite in a peculiarly
    momentary

    partnership(to instigate
    constructive
                horizontal
    business. . . .even so,let us make haste
    --consider well this ruined aqueduct

    lady,
    which used to lead something into somewhere)




xxxvi


    ta
    ppin
    g
    toe

    hip
    popot
    amus back

    gen
    teel-ly
    lugu-
    bri ous

          eyes
    looptheloop

    as

    fathandsbangrag




xxxvii


    poets yeggs and thirsties

    since we are spanked and put to sleep by dolls let
    us not be continually astonished should
    from their actions and speeches
    sawdust perpetually leak

    rather is it between such beddings and
    bumpings of ourselves to be observed
    how in this fundamental respect the well
    recognised regime of childhood is reversed

    meantime in dreams let us investigate
    thoroughly each one his optima rerum first
    having taken care to lie upon our
    abdomens for greater privacy and lest

    punished bottoms interrupt philosophy




xxxviii


will i ever forget that precarious moment?

as i was standing on the third rail waiting for the next train to grind
me into lifeless atoms various ab- surd thoughts slyly crept into my
highly sexed mind.

it seemed to me that i had first of all really made quite a mistake
in being at all born, seeing that i was wifeless and only half awake,
cursed with pimples, correctly dressed, cleanshaven above the nombril,
and much to my astonishment much impressed by having once noticed (
as an infantile phenomenon ) george washington almost incompletely
surrounded by well- drawn icecakes beheld being too strong, in brief
:an american, if you understand that i mean what i say i believe my
most intimate friends would never have gathered.

a collarbutton which had always not nothurt me not much and in the same
place.

why according to tomorrow’s paper the proletariat will not rise
yesterday.

inexpressible itchings to be photographed with lord rothermere playing
with lord rothermere billiards very well by moonlight with lord
rothermere.

a crockodile eats a native, who in revenge beats it insensible
with a banana, establishing meanwhile a re- ligious cult based on
consubstantial intangibility.

personne ne m’aime et j’ai les mains froides.

his royal highness said “peek-a-boo” and thirty tame fleas left the
prettily embroidered howdah im- mediately.

thumbprints of an angel named frederick found on a lightning-rod,
boston, mass.

such were the not unhurried reflections to which my organ of
imperception gave birth to which i should or- dinarily have objected to
which, considering the back- ground, it is hardly surprising if anyone
hardly should call exactly extraordinary. we refer, of course, to my
position. a bachelor incapable of occupation, he had long suppressed
the desire to suppress the suppressed desire of shall we say: idleness,
while meaning its opposite? nothing could be clearer to all concerned
than that i am not a policeman.

meanwhile the tea regressed.

kipling again h. g. wells, and anatole france shook hands again and yet
again shook again hands again, the former coachman with a pipewrench
of the again latter then opening a box of newly without exaggeration
shot with some difficulty sardines. mr. wiggin took wrs. miggin’s harm
in is, extinguishing the spitoon by a candle furnished by courtesy of
the management on thursdays, opposite which a church stood perfectly
upright but not piano item:a water- melon causes indigestion to william
cullen longfel- low’s small negro son, henry wordsworth bryant.

by this time,however,the flight of crows had ceased. i withdrew my
hands from the tennisracket. all was over. one brief convulsive
octopus, and then our hero folded his umbrella.

it seemed too beautiful.

let us perhaps excuse me if i repeat himself:these,or nearly these,were
the not unpainful thoughts which occupied the subject of our
attention;to speak even less objectively,i was horribly scared i would
actually fall off the rail before the really train after all arrived.
if i should have made this perfectly clear,it entirely would have been
not my fault.




xxxix


    voices to voices, lip to lip
    i swear (to noone everyone) constitutes
    undying; or whatever this and that petal confutes. . .
    to exist being a peculiar form of sleep

    what’s beyond logic happens beneath will;
    nor can these moments be translated: i say
    that even after april
    by god there is no excuse for may

    --bring forth your flowers and machinery:sculpture and prose
    flowers guess and miss
    machinery is the more accurate, yes
    it delivers the goods, heaven knows

    (yet are we mindful, though not as yet awake,
    of ourselves which shout and cling, being
    for a little while and which easily break
    in spite of the best overseeing)

    i mean that the blond absence of any program
    except last and always and first to live
    makes unimportant what i and you believe;
    not for philosophy does this rose give a damn. . .

    bring on your fireworks, which are a mixed
    splender of piston and of pistil; very well
    provided an instant may be fixed
    so that it will not rub, like any other pastel.

    (while you and i have lips and voices which
    are for kissing and to sing with
    who cares if some oneeyed son of a bitch
    invents an instrument to measure spring with?

    each dream nascitur,is not made. . .)
    why then to hell with that :the other; this,
    since the thing perhaps is
    to eat flowers and not to be afraid.




xl


    life hurl my
    yes,crumbles hand(ful released conarefetti)ev eryflitter,inga. where
    mil(lions of aflickf)litter ing brightmillion ofs hurl;edindodg:ing
    whom areeyes shy-dodge is bright crumbshandful,quick-hurl edinwho
    is flittercrumbs,fluttercrimbs are floatfallin,g;allwhere:
    a:crimbflitteringish is arefloatsis ingfallall!mil,shy milbrightlions
    my(hurl flicker handful
    in)dodging are shybrighteyes is crum bs(alll)if,ey es




two




i


    the season ’tis, my lovely lambs,

    of sumner volstead christ and co.
    the epoch of mann’s righteousness
    the age of dollars and no sense.
    which being quite beyond dispute

    as prove from troy (n. y.) to cairo
    (egypt) the luminous dithyrambs
    of large immaculate unmute
    antibolshevistic gents
    (each manufacturing word by word
    his own unrivalled brand of pyro
    -technic blurb anent the (hic)
    hero dead that gladly (sic)
    in far lands perished of unheard
    of maladies including flu)

    my little darlings, let us now
    passionately remember how--
    braving the worst, of peril heedless,
    each braver than the other, each
    (a typewriter within his reach)
    upon his fearless derrière
    sturdily seated--colonel needless
    to name and general you know who
    a string of pretty medals drew

    (while messrs jack james john and jim
    in token of their country’s love
    received my dears the order of
    the artificial arm and limb)

    --or, since bloodshed and kindred questions
    inhibit unprepared digestions,
    come:let us mildly contemplate
    beginning with his wellfilled pants
    earth’s biggest grafter, nothing less;
    the honorable mr. (guess)
    who, breathing on the ear of fate,
    landed a seat in the legislat-
    ure whereas tommy so and so
    (an erring child of circumstance
    whom the bulls nabbed at 33rd)

    pulled six months for selling snow




ii


    opening of the chambers close

    quotes the microscopic pithicoid president
    in a new frock
    coat(scrambling all
    up over the tribune dances crazily
    & &)&
    chatters about peacepeacepeace(to
    droppingly
    descend amid thunderous anthropoid applause)pronounced

    by the way pay the

    extremely artistic nevertobeextinguished fla
    -me of the(very prettily indeed)arra-
    nged souvenir of the in spite of himself fa
    -mous soldier minus his na-
    me(so as not to hurt the perspective of the(hei
    -nous thought)otherwise immaculately tabulated vicinity)invei-
    gles a few mildly curious rai
    -ned on people(both male and female
    created he

    then,    and every beast of the field




iii


    “next to of course god america i
    love you land of the pilgrims’ and so forth oh
    say can you see by the dawn’s early my
    country ’tis of centuries come and go
    and are no more what of it we should worry
    in every language even deafanddumb
    thy sons acclaim your glorious name by gorry
    by jingo by gee by gosh by gum
    why talk of beauty what could be more beaut-
    iful than these heroic happy dead
    who rushed like lions to the roaring slaughter
    they did not stop to think they died instead
    then shall the voices of liberty be mute?”

    he spoke. and drank rapidly a glass of water




iv


    it’s jolly
    odd what pops into
    your jolly tete when the
    jolly shells begin dropping jolly fast you
    hear the rrmp and
    then nearerandnearerandnearer
    and before
    you can

    !

    & we’re

    not
    (oh--
    --i say

    that’s jolly odd
    old thing, jolly
    odd, jolly
    jolly odd isn’t
    it jolly odd.




v


    look at this)
    a 75 done
    this nobody would
    have believed
    would they no
    kidding this was my particular

    pal
    funny aint
    it we was
    buddies
    i used to

    know
    him lift the
    poor cuss
    tenderly this side up handle

    with care
    fragile
    and send him home

    to his old mother in
    a new nice pine box

    (collect




vi


    first jock he
    was kilt a handsome
    man and james and
    next let me
    see yes will that was
    cleverest
    he was kilt and my youngest
    boy was kilt last with
    the big eyes i loved like you can’t
    imagine harry was o
    god kilt he was kilt everybody was kilt

    they called them the kilties




vii


    lis
    -ten

    you know what i mean when
    the first guy drops you know
    everybody feels sick or
    when they throw in a few gas
    and the oh baby shrapnel
    or my feet getting dim freezing or
    up to your you know what in water or
    with the bugs crawling right all up
    all everywhere over you all me everyone
    that’s been there knows what
    i mean a god damned lot of
    people don’t and never
    never
    will know,
    they don’t want

    to
    no




viii


    come, gaze with me upon this dome
    of many coloured glass, and see
    his mother’s pride, his father’s joy,
    unto whom duty whispers low

    “thou must!” and who replies “i can!”
    --yon clean upstanding well dressed boy
    that with his peers full oft hath quaffed
    the wine of life and found it sweet--

    a tear within his stern blue eye,
    upon his firm white lips a smile,
    one thought alone: to do or die
    for god for country and for yale

    above his blond determined head
    the sacred flag of truth unfurled,
    in the bright heyday of his youth
    the upper class american

    unsullied stands, before the world:
    with manly heart and conscience free,
    upon the front steps of her home
    by the high minded pure young girl

    much kissed, by loving relatives
    well fed, and fully photographed
    the son of man goes forth to war
    with trumpets clap and syphilis




ix


    little ladies more
    than dead exactly dance
    in my head, precisely
    dance where danced la guerre.

    mimi a
    la voix fragile
    qui chatouille des
    italiens

    the putain with the ivory throat
    marie louise lallemand
    n’es-ce pas que je suis belle
    cheri? les anglais m’aiment
    tous, les americains
    aussi. . . .“bon dos, bon cul de paris” (marie
    vierge
    priez
    pour
    nous)

    with the
    long lips of
    lucienne which dangle
    the old men and hot
    men se promenent
    doucement le soir(ladies

    accurately dead les anglais
    sont gentils et les americains
    aussi, ils payent bien les americains dance

    exactly in my brain voulez
    vous coucher avec
    moi? non? pourquoi?

    ladies skilfully
    dead precisely dance
    where has danced la
    guerre j’m’appelle
    manon, cinq rue henri mounier
    voulez vous coucher avec moi?
    te ferai mimi
    te ferai minette,
    dead exactly dance
    si vous voulez
    chatouiller
    mon lezard ladies suddenly
    j’m’en fout de negres

                         (in the twilight of paris
    marie louise with queenly
    legs cinq rue henri
    mounier a little love
    begs, mimi with the body
    like une boite a joujoux, want nice sleep?
    toutes les petites femmes exactes
    qui dansent toujours in my
    head dis-donc,paris

    ta gorge mysterieuse
    pourquoi se promene-t-elle, pourquoi
    eclate ta voix
    fragile couleur de pivoine?)
                                with the

    long lips of lucienne which
    dangle the old men and hot men
    precisely dance in my head
    ladies carefully dead




x


    16 heures
    l’etoile

    the communists have fine eyes

    some are young some old none
    look alike the flics rush
    batter the crowd sprawls collapses
    singing knocked down trampled the kicked by
    flics rush(the

    flics, tidiyum, are
    very tidiyum reassuringly similar,
    they all have very tidiyum
    mustaches, and very
    tidiyum chins, and just above
    their very tidiyum ears their
    very tidiyum necks begin)
                              let us add

    that there are 50(fifty)flics for every
    one(1)communist and
    all the flics are very organically
    arranged
    and their nucleus(composed
    of captains in freshly-creased
    -uniforms with only-just-
    shined buttons
    tidiyum
    before and behind)has a nucleolus:

    the prefect of police

    (a dapper derbied
    creature, swaggers daintily
    twiddling
    his tiny cane
    and, mazurkas about tweak-
    ing his wing collar pecking at his im

    -peccable cravat directing being
    shooting his cuffs
    saluted everywhere saluting
    reviewing processions of minions
    tappingpeopleontheback

    “allezcirculez”)

    --my      he’s brave. . . .
    the
    communists pick
    up themselves friends
    & their hats legs &

    arms brush dirt coats
    smile looking hands
    spit blood teeth

    the communists have(very)fine eyes
    (which stroll hither and thither through the
    evening in bruised narrow questioning faces)




xi


    my sweet old etcetera
    aunt lucy during the recent

    war could and what
    is more did tell you just
    what everybody was fighting

    for,
    my sister

    isabel created hundreds
    (and
    hundreds)of socks not to
    mention shirts fleaproof earwarmers

    etcetera wristers etcetera, my
    mother hoped that

    i would die etcetera
    bravely of course my father used
    to become hoarse talking about how it was
    a privilege and if only he
    could meanwhile my

    self etcetera lay quietly
    in the deep mud et

    cetera
    (dreaming,
    et
      cetera, of
    your smile
    eyes knees and of your etcetera)




three




i


    now that fierce few
    flowers(stealthily)
    in the alive west
    begin

    requiescat this six
    feet of breton big good
    body, which terminated
    in fists hair wood

    erect cursing hatless who
    (bent by wind)slammed hard--
    over the tiller;clattered
    forward skidding in outrageous

    sabots language trickling
    pried his black
    mouth with fat jibing
    lips,

    once upon a
    (that is
    over: and the sea heaving
    indolent colourless forgets)time

    requiescat.
    carry
    carefully the blessed large silent him
    into nibbling final worms




ii


    among

         these
              red pieces of
    day(against which and
    quite silently hills
    made of blueandgreen paper

    scorchbend ingthem
    -selves-u
    pcurv e,into:
                 anguish(clim
    b)ing
    s-p-i-r-a-
    l
     and,disappear)
                   satanic and blasé

    a black goat lookingly wanders

    there is nothing left of the world but
    into this noth
    ing il trene per
    roma si-gnori?
    jerk.
    ilyr,ushes




iii


    it is winter a moon in the afternoon
    and warm air turning into january darkness up
    through which sprouting gently, the cathedral
    leans its dreamy spine against thick sunset

    i perceive in front of our lady a ring of people
    a brittle swoon of centrifugally expecting
    faces clumsily which devours a man, three cats,
    five white mice, and a baboon.

    o a monkey with a sharp face waddling carefully
    the length of this padded pole;a monkey attached
    by a chain securely to this always talking
    individual, mysterious witty hatless.

    cats which move smoothly from neck to neck of bottles,cats
    smoothly willowing out and in between bottles,who step smoothly
    and rapidly along this pole over five squirming
    mice; or leap through hoops of fire,creating smoothness.

    people stare, the drunker applaud
    while twilight takes the sting out of the vermilion
    jacket of nodding hairy jaqueline who is given a mouse
    to hold lovingly,

    our lady what do you think of this? do your proud fingers and
    your arms tremble remembering something fragile
    and which had been presented unto you by a mystery?
    . . . the cathedral recedes into weather without answering




iv


    impossibly

    motivated by midnight
    the flyspecked abdominous female
    indubitably tellurian
    strolls
            emitting minute grins

    each an intaglio.
    nothing
    has also carved upon her much

    too white forehead a pair of
    eyes which mutter thickly(as one merely
    terriculous american an instant doubts
    the authenticity

    of these antiquities--relaxing
                                  hurries

    elsewhere;to blow

    incredible wampum




v


    inthe,exquisite;

    morning     sure     lyher eye s exactly sit,ata little roundtable
    among otherlittle roundtables her,eyes     count        slow(ly

    obstre poroustimidi ties surelyfl)oat ing,the

    ofpieces ofof sunligh tof fa l l in gof throughof treesof.

    (fields elysian

    the like,a)sleeping neck a breathing a  ,lies
    (slo wlythe wom an pa)ris her
    flesh:wakes
                in little streets

    while exactlygir lishlegs;play;ing;nake;d
    and

    chairs wait under the trees

    fields slowly elysian in
    a firmcool-ness     taxis,s.quirm

    and,  b etw ee nch air st ott er s thesillyold
    womansellingbaloons

    in theex qui site

    morning,
            her surelyeye s sit-ex actly her sitat a surely!little,
    roundtable amongother;littleexactly round.  tables,

    her
        .eyes




vi


    candles and

    here comes a glass box
    which the exhumed
    hand of saint ignatz miraculously
    inhabits. (people tumble
    down. people crumble to their
    knees. people
    begin crossing people)and

    here comes a glass box:
    surrounded by priests
    moving in fifty colours
    , sensuously

    (the crowd
    howls faintly
    blubbering pointing

    see
    yes)
    it
    here
    comes

    a glass
    box and incense with

    and oh sunlight--
    the crash of the
    colours(of the oh
    silently
    striding)priests-and-
    slowly,al,ways;procession:and

    enters

    this
        church.

    toward which the
    expectant stutter(upon artificial limbs,
    with faces like defunct geraniums)




vii


    paris;this april sunset completely utters
    utters serenely silently a cathedral

    before whose upward lean magnificent face
    the streets turn young with rain,

    spiral acres of bloated rose
    coiled within cobalt miles of sky
    yield to and heed
    the mauve
              of twilight(who slenderly descends,
    daintily carrying in her eyes the dangerous first stars)
    people move love hurry in a gently

    arriving gloom and
    see!(the new moon
    fills abruptly with sudden silver
    these torn pockets of lame and begging colour)while
    there and here the lithe indolent prostitute
    night,argues

    with certain houses




viii


    will out of the kindness of their hearts a few philosophers tell me
    what am i doing on top of this hill at calchidas, in the sunlight?
    down ever so far on the beach below me a little girl in white
      spins,tumbles;rolling in sand.
    across this water,crowding tints:browns and whites showing,the dotting
      millions of windows of thousands of houses--lisboa. like the crackle
      of a typewriter,in the afternoon sky.
    goats and sheep are driven by somebody along a curve of road which
     eats into a pink cliff back and up leaning out of yellowgreen water.

    they are building a house down there by the sea,in the afternoon.

    rapidly a reddish ant travels my fifth finger.
    a bird chirps in a tree,somewhere nowhere
    and a little girl in white is tumbling
    in sand
           clouds over
    me are like bridegrooms

    naked and luminous

                        (here the absurd i; life, to peer and wear clothes.
      i am altogether foolish, i suddenly make a fist out of ten fingers
    voices rise from down ever so far--
    hush.
          sunlight,
                   there are old men behind me i tell
          you;several,incredible,sleepy




ix


    but observe;although
    once is never the beginning of
    enough, is it(i do not pretend
    to know the reason any more than.)but look:up--

    raising, hoisting, a little
    perhaps that and this, deftly
    propping on smallest hands
    the slim hinging you
                        --because
    it’s five o’clock

    and these(i notice)trees winterbrief surly old
    gurgle a nonsense of sparrows, the cathedral
    shudders blackening;
    the sky is washed with tone

    now for a moon
    to squat in first darkness
    --a little moon thinner than

    memory

    faint
    -er
        than all the whys
    which lurk
    between your naked shoulderblades.--here

    comes a stout fellow in a blouse
    just outside this window, touching the glass

    boxes one by one with his magic
    stick(in which a willing
    bulb of flame bubbles)
                          see

    here and here they explode
    silently into crocuses of brightness. (that is enough
    of life, for you. i understand. once
    again. . . .)sliding

    a little downward,embrace me with your body’s suddenly
    curving entire warm questions




x


    sunlight was over
    our mouths fears hearts lungs arms hopes feet hands

    under us the unspeaking mediterranean bluer
    than we had imagined
    a few cries drifting through
    high air
    a sail a fishing boat somebody an invisible spectator,
    maybe certain nobodies laughing faintly

    playing moving far below us

    perhaps one villa caught like pieces
    of a kite in the trees, here
    and here reflecting
    sunlight
    (everywhere sunlight keen complete
    silent

    and everywhere you your kisses your flesh mind breathing
    beside under around myself)
                               by and by

    a fat colour reared itself against the sky and the sea

    . . . finally your eyes knew
    me, we smiled to each other, releasing lay, watching
    (sprawling, in
    grass upon a
    cliff) what had been something
    else carefully slowly fatally turning into ourselves . . .

    while in the very middle of fire all

    the world becoming bright and little melted.




four




i


    the moon looked into my window
    it touched me with its small hands
    and with curling infantile
    fingers it understood my eyes cheeks mouth
    its hands(slipping)felt of my necktie wandered
    against my shirt and into my body the
    sharp things fingered tinily my heart life

    the little hands withdrew, jerkily, themselves

    quietly they began playing with a button
    the moon smiled she
    let go my vest and crept
    through the window
    she did not fall
    she went creeping along the air
                                   over houses
                                              roofs

    and out of the east toward
    her a fragile light bent gatheringly




ii


    if being morticed with a dream
    myself speaks

    (whispering,
    suggesting that our souls
    inhabit whatever is between them)
    knowing my lips hands the way i move
    my habits laughter

    i say
    you will perhaps pardon,
    possibly you will comprehend.  and how
    this has arrived your mind may guess

    if at sunset
    it should, leaning against me, smile;
    or(between dawn and twilight)giving

    your eyes, present me also
    with the terror of shrines

    which noone has suspected(but
    wherein silently
    always
    are kneeling the various deaths
    which are your lover lady:together with what keen
    innumerable lives he has not lived.




iii


    here’s a little mouse)and
    what does he think about, i
    wonder as over this
    floor(quietly with

    bright eyes)drifts(nobody
    can tell because
    nobody knows, or why
    jerks here &, here,
    gr(oo)ving the room’s silence)this like
    a littlest
    poem a
    (with wee ears and see?

    tail frisks)
                    (gone)
    “mouse”,
            we are not the same you and

    i, since here’s a little he
    or is
    it it
    ?   (or was something we saw in the mirror)?

    therefore we’ll kiss;for maybe
    what was disappeared
    into ourselves
    who     (look).     ,startled




iv


    but if i should say
    goodmorning trouble adds
    up all sorts of quickly
    things on the slate of that
    nigger’s
    face(but

    if i should say thankyouverymuch

    mr rosenbloom picks strawberries
    with beringed hands)but if

    i should say solong my
    tailor
    chuckles

    like a woman in a dream(but if i
    should say
    now the all saucers
    but cups if begin to spoons dance every-

    should where say over the damned table and we
    hold lips eyes everything
    hands you know what
    happens)but if i should,
    say,




v


    in spite of everything
    which breathes and moves, since doom
    (with white longest hands
    neatening each crease)
    will smooth entirely our minds

    --before leaving my room
    i turn, and(stooping
    through the morning)kiss
    this pillow, dear
    where our heads lived and were.




vi


    you are not going to, dear. you are not going to and
    i but that doesn’t in the least matter. the big
    fear who held us deeply in his fist is

    no longer, can you imagine it
    i can’t which doesn’t matter
    and what does is possibly this dear, that we may resume
    impact with the inutile collide

    once more with the imaginable,love,and eat sunlight(do
    you believe it? i begin to and that doesn’t matter)which

    i suggest teach us a new terror always
    which shall brighten
    carefully these things we consider life.
    dear i put my eyes into you but that doesn’t matter
    further than of old

    because you fooled the doctors,i touch you with hopesand
    words and with so and so: we are together, we will
    kiss or smile or move. it’s different too isn’t it

    different dear from moving as we, you
    and i,used to move when i thought you were going to(but
    that doesn’t matter)
    when you thought you were going to america.
                                                then

    moving was a matter of not keeping still;we were
    two alert lice in the blond hair of nothing




vii


    since feeling is first
    who pays any attention
    to the syntax of things
    will never wholly kiss you;

    wholly to be a fool
    while spring is in the world

    my blood approves,
    and kisses are a better fate
    than wisdom
    lady i swear by all flowers. don’t cry
    --the best gesture of my brain is less than
    your eyelids’ flutter which says

    we are for each other: then
    laugh, leaning back in my arms
    for life’s not a paragraph

    and death i think is no parenthesis




viii


    some ask praise of their fellows
    but i being otherwise
    made compose curves
    and yellows, angles or silences
    to a less erring end)

    myself is sculptor of
    your body’s idiom:
    the musician of your wrists;
    the poet who is afraid
    only to mistranslate

    a rhythm in your hair,
    (your fingertips
    the way you move)
                      the

    painter of your voice--
    beyond these elements

    remarkably nothing is. . . . therefore,lady
    am i content should any
    by me carven thing provoke
    your gesture possibly or

    any painting(for its own

    reason)in your lips
    slenderly should create one least smile
    (shyly
    if a poem should lift to
    me the distinct country of your
    eyes, gifted with green twilight)




ix


    supposing i dreamed this)
    only imagine, when day has thrilled
    you are a house around which
    i am a wind--

    your walls will not reckon how
    strangely my life is curved
    since the best he can do
    is to peer through windows, unobserved

    --listen, for(out of all
    things)dream is noone’s fool;
    if this wind who i am prowls
    carefully around this house of you

    love being such, or such,
    the normal corners of your heart
    will never guess how much
    my wonderful jealousy is dark

    if light should flower:
    or laughing sparkle from
    the shut house(around and around
    which a poor wind will roam




x


    you are like the snow only
    purer fleeter, like the rain
    only sweeter frailer you

    whom certain
    flowers ressemble but trembling(cowards
    which fear
    to miss within your least gesture the hurting
    skill which lives)and since

    nothing lingers
    beyond a little instant,
    along with rhyme and with laughter
    o my lady
    (and every brittle marvelous breathing thing)

    since i and you are on our ways to dust

    of your fragility
    (but chiefly of your smile,
    most suddenly which is
    of love and death a marriage)you give me

    courage
    so that against myself
    the sharp days slobber in vain:

    nor am i afraid that
    this, which we call autumn, cleverly
    dies and over the ripe world wanders with
    a near and careful
    smile in his mouth(making

    everything suddenly old and with his awkward eyes
    pushing
    sleep under and thoroughly
    into all beautiful things)

    winter, whom spring shall kill




xi


    because
    you go away i give roses who
    will advise even yourself, lady
    in the most certainly(of what we
    everywhere do not touch)deep
    things;
          remembering ever so
    tinily these, your crisp
    eyes actually shall contain new faeries

    (and if your slim lips are amused, no wisest

    painter of fragile
    marys will understand
    how smiling may be made as
    skilfully.) but carry
    also, with that indolent and with
    this flower wholly whom you do
    not ever fear,
                me in your heart

    softly;not all
    but the beginning

    of myself




xii


    you being in love
    will tell who softly asks in love,

    am i separated from your body smile brain hands merely
    to become the jumping puppets of a dream? oh i mean:
    entirely having in my careful how
    careful arms created this at length
    inexcusable, this inexplicable pleasure--you go from several
    persons:believe me that strangers arrive
    when i have kissed you into a memory
    slowly, oh seriously
    --that since and if you disappear

    solemnly
    myselves
    ask “life, the question how do i drink dream smile

    and how do i prefer this face to another and
    why do i weep eat sleep--what does the whole intend”
    they wonder. ohandthey cry “to be,being,thatiamalive
    this absurd fraction in its lowest terms
    with everything cancelled
    but shadows
    --what does it all come down to? love? love
    if you like and i like, for the reason that i
    hate people and lean out of this window is love,love
    and the reason that i laugh and breathe is oh love and the reason

    that i do not fall into this street is love.”




xiii


    nobody wears a yellow
    flower in his buttonhole
    he is altogether a queer fellow
    as young as he is old

    when autumn comes,
    who twiddles his white thumbs
    and frisks down the boulevards

    without his coat and hat

    --(and i wonder just why that
    should please him or i wonder what he does)

    and why(at the bottom of this trunk,
    under some dirty collars)only a
    moment
    (or
    was it perhaps a year)ago i found staring

    me in the face a dead yellow small rose




xiv


    it is so long since my heart has been with yours

    shut by our mingling arms through
    a darkness where new lights begin and
    increase,
    since your mind has walked into
    my kiss as a stranger
    into the streets and colours of a town--

    that i have perhaps forgotten
    how, always(from
    these hurrying crudities
    of blood and flesh)love
    coins his most gradual gesture,

    and whittles life to eternity

    --after which our separating selves become museums
    filled with skilfully stuffed memories




xv


    i am a beggar always
    who begs in your mind

    (slightly smiling, patient, unspeaking
    with a sign on his
    breast
    blind)yes i

    am this person of whom somehow
    you are never wholly rid(and who

    does not ask for more than
    just enough dreams to
    live on)
            after all, kid

    you might as well
    toss him a few thoughts

    a little love preferably,
    anything which you can’t
    pass off on other people: for
    instance a
    plugged promise--

    then he will maybe(hearing something
    fall into his hat)go wandering
    after it with fingers;till having

    found
    what was thrown away
                        himself
    taptaptaps out of your brain, hopes, life

    to(carefully turning a
    corner)never bother you any more.




xvi


    if within tonight’s erect
    everywhere of black muscles feels
    a weightless slowness(deftly

    muting the world’s texture with drifted

    gifts of featheriest slenderness and
    how gradually which descending are suddenly
    received)or by doomfull connivance

    accurately thither and hither myself

    struts unremembered(rememberingly
    with in both pockets curled hands moves)
    why then toward morning he is a ghost whom

    assault these whispering fists of hail

    (and a few windows awaken certain faces
    busily horribly blunder through new light
    hush we are made of the same thing as perhaps

    nothing, he murmurs carefully lying down)




xvii


    how this uncouth enchanted
    person, arising from a
    restaurant, looks breathes or moves
    --climbing(past light after
    light)to turn, disappears

    the very swift and
    invisibly living
    rhythm of your heart possibly

    will understand;
    or why(in

    this most exquisite of cities)all
    of the long night a fragile imitation of
    (perhaps)myself carefully wanders
    streets dark and, deep

    with rain. . . .

    (he, slightly whom or
    cautiously this person

    and this imitation resemble,
    descends into the earth with the year
    a cigarette between his ghost-lips

    gradually)
    remembering badly, softly
    your
    kissed thrice suddenly smile




xviii


    i go to this window

    just as day dissolves
    when it is twilight(and
    looking up in fear

    i see the new moon
    thinner than a hair)

    making me feel
    how myself has been coarse and dull
    compared with you, silently who are
    and cling
    to my mind always

    but now she sharpens and becomes crisper
    until i smile with knowing
    --and all about
    herself

    the sprouting largest final air

    plunges
          inward with hurled
    downward thousands of enormous dreams




five




i


    after all white horses are in bed

    will you walking beside me, my very lady,
    if scarcely the somewhat city
    wiggles in considerable twilight

    touch (now) with a suddenly unsaid

    gesture lightly my eyes?
    and send life out of me and the night
    absolutely into me. . . . a wise
    and puerile moving of your arm will
    do suddenly that

                    will do
    more than heroes beautifully in shrill
    armour colliding on huge blue horses,
    and the poets looked at them, and made verses,

    through the sharp light cryingly as the knights flew.




ii


    touching you i say (it being spring
    and night) “let us go a very little beyond
    the last road--there’s something to be found”

    and smiling you answer “everything
    turns into something else, and slips away. . . .
    (these leaves are thingish with moondrool
    and i’m ever so very little afraid”)
                                        i say
    “along this particular road the moon if you’ll
    notice follows us like a big yellow dog. you

    don’t believe? look back. (along the sand
    behind us, a big yellow dog that’s . . . . now it’s red
    a big red dog that may be owned by who
    knows)
          only turn a little your. so. and

    there’s the moon,there is something faithful and mad”




iii


    along the brittle treacherous bright streets
    of memory comes my heart,singing like
    an idiot, whispering like a drunken man

    who(at a certain corner, suddenly)meets
    the tall policeman of my mind.
                                    awake
    being not asleep, elsewhere our dreams began
    which now are folded:but the year completes
    his life as a forgotten prisoner

    --“ici?”--“ah non, mon cheri; il fait trop froid”--
    they are gone:along these gardens moves a wind bringing
    rain and leaves, filling the air with fear
    and sweetness. . . .pauses. (halfwhispering. . . .halfsinging

    stirs the always smiling chevaux de bois)

    when you were in paris we met here




iv


    our touching hearts slenderly comprehend
    (clinging as fingers, loving one another
    gradually into hands) and bend
    into the huge disaster of the year:

    like this most early single star which tugs

    weakly at twilight, caught in thickening fear
    our slightly fingering spirits starve and smother;
    until autumn abruptly wholly hugs

    our dying silent minds, which hand in hand
    at some window try to understand
    the
       (through pale miles of perishing air, haunted
    with huddling infinite wishless melancholy,
    suddenly looming) accurate undaunted

    moon’s bright third tumbling slowly




v


    if i have made,my lady,intricate
    imperfect various things chiefly which wrong
    your eyes(frailer than most deep dreams are frail)
    songs less firm than your body’s whitest song
    upon my mind--if i have failed to snare
    the glance too shy--if through my singing slips
    the very skillful strangeness of your smile
    the keen primeval silence of your hair

    --let the world say “his most wise music stole
    nothing from death”--
                         you only will create
    (who are so perfectly alive)my shame:
    lady through whose profound and fragile lips
    the sweet small clumsy feet of april came

    into the ragged meadow of my soul.

       *       *       *       *       *




transcriber’s note


non-standard spelling retained.

in the original on page 46, the poem “this evangelist” is missing a
line from the third stanza. that stanza in other editions is:

the editor cigarstinking hobgoblin swims
upward in hisswivelchair one fist dangling scandal while
five other fingers snitch
rapidly through mist a defunct king as

also in the original on page 55, the poem “life hurl my” was placed
landscape on the page.









*** end of the project gutenberg ebook is 5 ***


    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™

project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.

the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.

﻿the project gutenberg ebook of the porcelain mask
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: the porcelain mask
        a detective story

author: john jay chichester

release date: october 10, 2025 [ebook #77022]

language: english

original publication: new york city: chelsea house, 1924

credits: tim miller, mary meehan and the online distributed proofreading team at https://www.pgdp.net (this file was produced from images generously made available by the internet archive)


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook the porcelain mask ***





                          the porcelain mask

                          _a detective story_

                        by john jay chichester

                             chelsea house
                           79 seventh avenue
                             new york city

                            copyright, 1924
                           by chelsea house

                          the porcelain mask

               (printed in the united states of america)

    all rights reserved, including that of translation into foreign
                languages, including the scandinavian.

                             to my aunts,

                             ella and anna

                  who once told a very small boy that
                  he would some day grow up and write
                                a book.




                               contents


                       i. joan sheridan returns

                      ii. the squalid house

                     iii. helen answers her letter

                      iv. "what does it mean?"

                       v. victor sarbella

                      vi. in the studio

                     vii. the get-away

                    viii. caught in the web

                      ix. the open door

                       x. common sense

                      xi. bushnell calls the police

                     xii. "wiggly" price

                    xiii. what did joan know?

                     xiv. the girl in the sarbella case

                      xv. sarbella speaks

                     xvi. the four clews

                    xvii. kirklan protests

                   xviii. two brands of cigarettes

                     xix. enter sergeant tish

                      xx. a queer jumble

                     xxi. a cry of terror

                    xxii. what the cook saw

                   xxiii. the trapped rat

                    xxiv. haskins keeps his secret

                     xxv. the skepticism of sergeant tish

                    xxvi. bits of tallow

                   xxvii. wiggly remains unconvinced

                  xxviii. the black smudge

                    xxix. "let the guilty man speak!"

                     xxx. wiggly makes a wager




                          the porcelain mask




                               chapter i

                         joan sheridan returns


one of the village taxis, a sorry, disreputable affair, with noisily
clattering fenders, dashed bumpily along the rural highway and turned
with precarious suddenness into the driveway, lined on either side by
great walnut trees that formed a leafy tunnel to the big house at the
far end. it was, despite considerable age, a magnificent house, and it
had been modernized with green-striped awnings and sun rooms. the taxi
was heavily loaded with luggage. there was one passenger, a girl of
twenty-one or two, with an attractive face and expressive dark eyes,
now shining with a light of eagerness, as she leaned toward the door of
the jouncing vehicle. one slim, gloved hand rested upon the catch.

the little car came to a skidding halt beneath the old-fashioned
portico, as the driver jammed the brakes with a suddenness that pitched
his fare violently forward, knocking her hat awry. but even this failed
to dim her happy, expectant smile; she did not so much as bother to
straighten the hat. she had the door open and was out before the driver
could double as footman.

"hope i didn't jar you up, lady, but y' said hurry, an' i fed 'er the
gas," he said with a wide grin that revealed two prominently missing
teeth. "she's a great li'le car, ain't she, fer goin' on the fifth
season?"

the girl nodded and gave him a dollar bill.

"don't bother about the bags," she told him. "just leave them anywhere,
and i'll have bates carry them in."

she ran briskly up the brief rise of steps from the driveway to the
wide porch that semicircled the house on two sides. the entrance was
around the turn; she paused suddenly at sight of the strange young
woman who reclined in the couch hammock, asleep. for a moment she
stared in surprise, wondering who she was. women visitors were unusual
at greenacres.

"how beautiful she is!" murmured the girl, letting her eyes linger on
the soft, oval face of the sleeper, crowned with bronze hair. "i wonder
who she can be?" she softened her step and continued across the porch
to the entrance.

hardly had she entered the reception hall when bates spied her and came
rushing toward her, with that peculiar, shambling gait of his, a broad
smile crinkling his thin, leathery face.

"heaven bless us, it's miss joan!" he exclaimed.

"oh, 'daddy' bates!" she cried. "it's so wonderful to get home again!
the finest thing about going away is coming back. only bit over a
month, and it's seemed a year!"

bates was the gilmore butler, but he had been in the family since the
time joan was a child, and, in this moment of home-coming exuberance,
it was only natural that she should use the old affectionate address.
bates, his hands clasped in front of his chest, continued to smile
fondly and proudly.

"well! well!" he chuckled. "won't mrs. gilmore be happy to see you
again, miss joan! surprised, too; she wasn't expecting you until
to-morrow."

"the boat docked a day ahead of time," she explained, "and i didn't
telegraph. where is mother?"

"she went upstairs less than half an hour since. your bags, miss joan?"

"outside, bates; i told the taxi man to dump them out any old place.
take them right up, if you please, bates; there are some little things
i bought on the other side, and i didn't forget you, either."

bates sobered.

"your room----" he began, but broke off suddenly, looking decidedly
uncomfortable.

joan, in her excitement, did not notice. "why, of course, my room!" she
cried gayly, making for the stairs and taking the steps, two at a time.
bates stared after her, wagging his head sadly, and his thin shoulders
moved with a lugubrious sigh.

"poor miss joan!" he murmured. "it's going to be an awful shock to her;
i didn't have the heart to tell her. and her room, too!" he shambled
out to the porch for the luggage.

reaching the upper hall, joan went swiftly to the left wing of the
house, where her mother had her private sitting room, bedroom, and
bath. with a quick gesture she flung open the door and, arms reaching
out eagerly, fairly leaped at the little gray-haired woman who sat by
the window, reading.

"mumsey!"

before mrs. gilmore could get to her feet, the girl had swooped down
on her in a cyclone of joy, smothering her with kisses and leaving her
almost breathless with hugs.

"i--i didn't expect you until to-morrow, dear," gasped mrs. gilmore.
"why didn't you wire and let us meet you at the station? goodness,
child, give me air!"

"oh, it's so much nicer to surprise people," laughed joan. "how are
you?"

"we've all been well."

joan sat on the arm of the chair and cuddled her mother close.

"it's so wonderful to be home again," she murmured happily. "it was
a wonderful trip, my first sea voyage, and the sharps were perfectly
wonderful to me--all through southern france by motor--but there's no
place in all the world like greenacres. how is kirk getting along with
the new novel? has he missed his severest critic?"

an anxious, half-frightened look came into mrs. gilmore's face.
"kirklan," she answered slowly, an ominous note creeping into her
voice, "hasn't been writing much during--during the past three weeks.
he couldn't really be expected to, since----"

joan's fingers tightened about her mother's hand.

"mother! something--something has happened to kirk! is he ill?"

"no, dear, kirklan is perfectly well, but he----" again mrs. gilmore's
voice came to a halting stop.

"why don't you tell me? the tone of your voice frightens me. what has
happened to kirk?"

"an author can't be expected to do much writing, joan, when--when he is
on his honeymoon," mrs. gilmore finished faintly. she felt the girl's
fingers, still resting across her own, tremble and become cold.

joan's face had turned ghastly pale and there was a stunned dullness in
her dark eyes. "his--his honeymoon?" she whispered. "you mean----oh,
you can't mean that kirk has married?"

mrs. gilmore nodded.

"yes, he married--about ten days after you sailed. it was a surprise--a
shock--to all of us. the first we knew of it was when he brought her
home with him."

joan was making an ineffectual attempt to keep her emotions in check,
to conceal the evidence that the news had been a terrible blow to her.

"why--why, i had no idea that kirk was even interested in any one."

"neither did any of us. it seems that he fell madly in love with her
almost at first sight; they were married, i believe, a week after their
first meeting. i can't understand how a man would rush headlong into
marriage like that, although she is pretty."

joan's mind reverted to the beautiful woman she had seen asleep in the
porch hammock.

"she--she is here now? then that--that woman i saw downstairs is kirk's
wife? kirk's wife?" she laughed unsteadily. "it's so hard for me to
believe--coming so suddenly like this. yes, she is pretty; not only
pretty--beautiful."

she walked slowly to the window and stood there, her back to the room,
trying to keep her face from her mother's eyes. but mrs. gilmore was
not deceived; she had known for a long time and had feared that the
situation would bring only unhappiness.

although joan was mrs. gilmore's daughter, she still bore her father's
name of sheridan. her mother, left a widow, had married peyton gilmore,
a childhood sweetheart, who had himself been previously married. peyton
gilmore had been a well-known new york lawyer. those with long memories
may remember that he had dropped dead in a crowded courtroom, during a
famous murder trial, while pleading for the life of his client. there
was a son, kirklan gilmore, only twelve years old at the time of his
father's death, and kirklan's rearing had fallen to his stepmother. the
two families, merged into one, had long occupied the picturesque, rural
new york estate of greenacres, without friction or discord.

joan and kirklan had always hit it off well together, and when, after a
try at law, kirklan had turned to writing, it was joan who sympathized
the most over his failures and rejoiced the most over his successes.
realizing that joan's deft touches had helped the tremendous success of
his novel, "rogue's paradise," kirklan had given his stepsister a trip
abroad.

the silence became so long, so painful that mrs. gilmore felt that
something had to be said.

"her name," she murmured, "is helen--helen banton before she married
kirklan."

"does--does he seem to be--very much in love with her, mother?"

"very much in love with her," mrs. gilmore answered, and joan winced.

"i--i hope he will be very happy," the latter said with a muffled voice.

mrs. gilmore shook her head slowly. "i'm afraid that he won't be, my
dear. a pretty face is not sufficient to make a man happy. 'marry in
haste, repent at leisure.' it's an old saying, but it's true--as most
of the old sayings are. kirklan has made a mistake, a terrible mistake."

"i don't believe you like her, mother."

"my likes or dislikes have nothing to do with it. they have few tastes
in common; already she is sick and tired of greenacres, and you know
how kirklan loves it out here. she has no interest in his work, and you
know how much he needs sympathy, encouragement. he's not the kind that
can forge on alone; the kind of wife he should have----"

"mother, don't! who was she--how did he happen to meet her?"

"she was employed in some minor capacity by kirklan's publishers," mrs.
gilmore replied. "as to who she is--i wonder. yes, i wonder. i don't
think even kirklan knows anything about her. i don't consider it a good
sign when a girl is reticent about her family. kirklan says, 'i've
married a girl i love, not a family tree.'"

joan winced again, for that was a line she had written into kirklan's
successful novel.

"if--if they're in love with each other, mother, i suppose that's all
that matters."

"he's in love with her, but they're not in love with each other, and
those one-sided romances always end in disaster. i can't help but feel
that she is going to smash his life."

"she--she'd better not!" whispered joan, her hands clenched. "we won't
talk about it any more--please. i'm going to my room and unpack.
i'll--i'll come back in a little while, mother." her tone was weary,
lifeless.

mrs gilmore gave her daughter another quick glance, as she prepared to
deliver the second blow.

"i--i guess you'll miss your old room, joan; you've always loved it so,
with its view of the river."

startled, bewildered, the girl turned away from the window. "miss my
old room? why, mother, what--what do you mean?"

"kirklan had your things moved to the east wing, dear. he tried to make
her understand, but----"

"the things moved--from my room!" cried joan. "kirklan did that? he--he
tried to make her understand? you mean that woman----"

"it wasn't kirklan's fault, joan; he tried hard enough to reason with
her, but his wife is so headstrong. it is the best room in the house,
of course, and i suppose she felt that she had a right, as the new
mistress of greenacres, to it. the place is kirklan's property."

"that--that woman--in my room!" there was a catching sob in joan's
voice. "oh, how dare she? and kirk let her do it."

"you don't understand how headstrong she is," mrs. gilmore explained
hastily. "she's the sort who demands, who takes what she wants. kirklan
tried to avert it, but i suppose it's hard for a man to deny his bride
anything. kirklan has the adjoining room, a separate sleeping chamber.
it's the modern thing, i believe, these days. she's had a doorway cut
through; the carpenters finished their work yesterday. i knew you would
resent giving up your room."

"of course i resent it!" flared joan. "she has no right----" she paused
and then added bitterly, "no, i suppose i'm wrong; the house is kirk's,
and she did have a right--to everything. i'm going to unpack now, there
are some little souvenirs i brought back with me----"

this was but an excuse to get away, to be alone. leaving the sentence
unfinished, she fled. a moment later she was in the east wing, where
her personal belongings had been banished by the usurper. some
one--kirk, no doubt--had tried to hang her pictures in the same
position they had occupied in the beloved room that had been hers for
so long. an effort had been made to make things appear the same, but
they were not the same; they would never be the same. here she felt a
stranger, almost like a guest in a transient hotel. nothing would ever
be the same--now.

bates had already brought up her bags, and they were stacked in an
orderly pile on the floor, but joan made no move to unpack. that had
been but an excuse. she stumbled toward her bed and flung herself
across it, giving way to a torrent of tears.

"i love him so!" she sobbed. "it never would have happened--if i hadn't
gone away. i know it wouldn't have happened. no other woman has a right
to him when i love him so much."

presently she got herself in check and went listlessly to the window
and, lifting back the curtains, looked out. from here she had not so
much as a glimpse of the tappan zee, where the hudson broadens a good
three miles wide. in her old room, curled up in the window seat, with
soft pillows at her back, she had been able to look out across the
water to the rugged rise of the palisades looming up picturesquely from
the new jersey shore--and dream.

and now in that other room--her room--would be kirklan's wife! perhaps
the other woman and kirklan would sit in her beloved window seat, his
arm about her; the thought of it made the blood pound in joan's brain,
made a red mist swim before her eyes.

below her a figure moved across the lawn, a graceful figure in a white
sport skirt. even from that distance the woman's bronze hair glinted in
the strong sunlight. joan stared down, her hands clenching until the
nails bit deep into her palms.

"she has taken two of the things i have loved best!" she whispered
fiercely. "i hate her! i can't help it, i hate her!"




                              chapter ii

                           the squalid house


relic of the horse-and-carriage days was the gilmore stable, with
living quarters for the now obsolete coachman and footman. kirklan
gilmore, that he might have more detachment and quiet than the house
afforded, had remodeled the stable into a studio, and here it was
that he did his writing. success in anything means hard work, and
authorship is no exception. being a successful novelist, he was a hard
worker, but for weeks now, except for a mildly curious visit by helen,
who had been frankly disappointed in the unpretentiousness of her
husband's workshop, the place had been locked. the manuscript of the
new novel, for which his publishers waited fretfully, lay untouched and
uncompleted.

it was two days after joan's home-coming. as had been customary since
her arrival at greenacres as a bride, the new mrs. gilmore was having a
breakfast tray in her room, and she sat at a small table by the window
which commanded joan sheridan's beloved view of the tappan zee.

frilly, lacy things were becoming to the new mistress of greenacres,
and she was an alluring picture, with the loose, flowing sleeves of
her morning gown falling back from shapely arms, as she lifted her
coffee cup. morning is the severest test of a woman's beauty, and, only
twenty minutes out of bed, although it was half an hour past nine,
helen gilmore was undeniably a beautiful woman. her age might have been
twenty-three; it may have been even twenty-seven, for she was of the
type that clings long to youth. just now, however, there was in her
blue eyes a look of brooding discontent that does not become a bride of
three brief, honeymooning weeks.

at the hallway door there sounded the rap of knuckles against wood, and
in answer to the petulant, "yes, come," bates, the butler, crossed the
threshold with his shambling gait.

"mail for you, madam," said bates, holding a silver tray toward her.
the topmost envelope was patently an advertising circular, which
completely concealed the one beneath, and helen with a contemptuous
glance waved the tray aside.

"you should know better than bothering me with things like that," she
said shortly; "take it away."

"there is also a letter--a personal letter," bates answered stiffly, as
he moved aside the offending advertisement, and revealed a small, cheap
envelope, rather smudgy and addressed with a lead pencil in a ragged,
scrawling script, as if the hand that wrote it was not far advanced
beyond illiteracy. the postmark was new york city.

rather a strange, disreputable-looking missive, one might have thought,
to be received by the mistress of greenacres. bates stared sharply, as
he saw the startling effect that the sight of the letter had on mrs.
gilmore. her coffee cup, poised for a moment in mid-air, clattered down
to the saucer, and her fingers, reaching swiftly for the envelope,
trembled noticeably. her face had gone white, and into her eyes there
came a look that was unquestionably apprehension, perhaps fear. with
an effort she controlled herself.

"probably from my little nephew," she said, evidently thinking to
explain the smudgy appearance, the crudity of the handwriting. but
bates, moving toward the door with the perfunctory murmur, was not
misled.

"huh, little nephew!" he grunted, as he went down the hall. "that
was a man's handwritin'. poor mr. kirklan! i'm afraid he's been
fooled--fooled bad."

when the butler had gone, helen gilmore relaxed self-restraint, and
there returned to her face that haunted look of fear. several times she
turned the envelope over in her unsteady hands, delaying the opening of
it.

"he's traced me here!" she whispered. "he knows."

after another moment of hesitation she opened the envelope and drew
forth a sheet of paper. quickly her eyes went over the scrawl. it
began with the address, "dear mrs. gilmore," and the last two words of
that were underscored, as if there was a concealed gibe in the "mrs.
gilmore."

    i want to talk with you on some business. if you don't want me to
    come there, you better come to see me. phone joe's place & he'll
    tell you where i am.

it was unsigned, but no signature was needed for her to know the
identity of the sender; she knew that all too well. her hands clenched,
crushing the paper between her fingers.

"oh, what a fool i've been to take this chance!" she exclaimed
bitterly. "he'll hound me, as he hounded me before. i--i thought i'd
got away from him for good. i thought he was----"

a step sounded down the hall, a quick step that she had learned to know
during the past three weeks. hastily she thrust the crumpled letter
and its envelope into the bodice of her morning gown and, as the door
opened, forced a smile to her lips.

"good morning, my dear," she greeted her husband. "your indolent wife
is just finishing her breakfast. you look as if you had been up for
hours, and you must be going somewhere!"

kirklan gilmore, clad in a gray business suit, instead of white
flannels, blazer coat, and canvas oxfords that he wore for his mornings
at home, crossed the room eagerly and bent to kiss the lips raised
dutifully to him.

gilmore was dark, while his wife was fair. he was slender, and his
eyes had something of a poet's dreaminess in them--black eyes, with
an intense light when he felt any strong emotion, either personally
or through the characters that he put down on paper and breathed the
breath of life into. he sat down beside the narrow table and touched
his fingers in a gentle caress to the back of his wife's hand, as his
eyes devoured her fondly.

"you don't know how wonderful you are, helen! if i could only put you
into a book--as you are. but i'm afraid it would turn out to be a
volume of poetry, and poetry doesn't make a best seller. you--you are
the most beautiful thing that ever lived!"

despite an agitation that she could hardly keep from being observed,
helen flushed, and her eyes lighted with pleasure. she liked being
told she was beautiful. it was the one story that never grew old to her.

"thanks, kirklan; it's nice of you to say that--especially in the
morning. why the street clothes? are you going somewhere?"

"yes, i am, worse luck. that slave-driving publisher of mine has called
a halt to our honeymoon. a wire came from him this morning, commanding
me to come in town and see him. i know what that means; he's going to
pep me and send me back to my knitting. well, we can't blame atchinson
for that; i've promised him the new book for winter publication. thank
heaven, it's two thirds finished. i thought we might run into new york
together; make the trip in the car, you know. there'll be lunch with
atchinson."

helen managed to look languid and bored. "lunch with that old pill,
atchinson? it doesn't appeal to me; but don't you think we might go
away while you are finishing the book? it will take you weeks upon
weeks, and that means i've got to stick around this poky hole, mooning
around by myself, while you're locked in that old stable for endless
hours. i'd like to go away, kirklan."

kirklan patted his wife's hand.

"i'd like to, helen, but i'm used to things out here, and a change
usually upsets my work very badly. i've got to dig in now for all i'm
worth. poky old hole? i thought you liked greenacres."

"i don't; i hate it. oh, don't start harping about 'the scenery;' the
scenery's all right for a change, but i'm fed up on it. outside of
gawking around the country, there's nothing to do but get up, eat, and
then go to bed again. i don't know why we couldn't go down to--well,
atlantic city, while you're finishing the book."

"oh, tut!" gilmore reproved mildly. "you've just got out on the wrong
side of the bed this morning. it's quite impossible for us to go away.
it won't be lonesome for you now that joan is back. she's no end of
good fun, joan. greatest little pal in the world. and that reminds me
that i must ask her to help me straighten out the sixteenth chapter.
there's a little something it lacks, and i can always depend on joan to
supply just the right touch."

helen laughed, but not pleasantly. "yes," she said with an edge of
sarcasm, "that stepsister of yours and i would make great pals--not!
it's all that she can do to be civil. sometimes i feel that she
actually hates me!"

"that's nonsense, helen. joan hate you? how ridiculous! joan never
hated any one in her life."

"it's not ridiculous!" flared helen; she was one of those persons who
always flared when contradicted. she could not brook opposition, even
verbal opposition. "i tell you, miss sheridan dislikes me intensely."

"she might be a little hurt--temporarily," admitted gilmore. "i'm sorry
we didn't leave the room alone until she got back. perhaps it doesn't
seem quite right, moving her out while she was away."

"every one in the house looks upon me as--as an interloper," helen
rushed on. "even the servants--i can feel their antagonism toward me. i
don't know why i should be asked to--to tolerate such treatment."

"try and look at things more calmly," soothed gilmore. "naturally,
everything seems strange to you at first. both my stepmother and joan
are wonderful, helen--real mother and sister to me. you'll learn to
love them very much; please, helen, for my sake, you'll try."

"and you expect to let them make their home with us permanently?" she
demanded bitterly.

kirklan gilmore looked uncomfortable, unhappy; this was the first rift
in the lute. he was discovering that his wife, after all, was not quite
the perfect woman. it is a painful realization for a new husband.

"w-well," he said slowly, "i hadn't thought of that. this has been my
stepmother's home for almost twenty years, and, while it belongs to me
legally, i wouldn't think for a moment of pitching her out." he paused
for a moment, and his tone had a touch of wistfulness in it. "it's
always been my home, too, helen. to me there is no place quite like
greenacres; i--i wish you'd really try to be happy here."

helen did not respond with that sympathetic understanding he had
hoped for, and kirklan, of course, could not know that the receipt of
the letter only a few minutes before had filled her with a desperate
anxiety to flee from the thing that threatened her.

"you--you won't--take me away?" she persisted.

"helen, you don't know how hard it is for me to deny you any wish.
heaven knows i want to make you happy, but can't you understand that
we've got to be practical? my studio is here; my library is here; and
it's here that i've always done my best work. at least wait until the
book is finished, and then, if you still do not like greenacres, we--we
will see what we can do." there was, despite his conciliatory tone,
a note of firmness, and helen, with a shrug of her pretty shoulders,
dismissed the subject temporarily.

"you won't go into town with me?" asked gilmore. "it will be a change,
and i think you'll find it a pleasant trip in the car."

helen thought swiftly and came to a decision. she did want to go to new
york, but certainly not with her husband; she must forestall any effort
of the unsigned sender of that letter to see her at greenacres. the
sooner the better.

"why don't you use the train, kirklan, and let me have the car?" she
suggested. "i'd like to take the ferry across the river to nyack and
drive out toward tuxedo."

gilmore agreed promptly. "suppose you take joan along," he suggested.
"you can't help liking her after the first strangeness wears off;
really you've no idea what a perfect little brick she is."

helen shook her head. "no," she refused, "i'd rather be alone to-day."
and that much was true.

gilmore looked at his watch and moved toward his wife for a parting
embrace; it was the first time he had left her, even for a trip to
new york, and, madly in love with helen as he was, the prospect was
depressing.

"you'll be careful about driving," he warned. "stay on the country
roads and out of the traffic; you're still a bit new at it, you know.
i've just time to get the ten-thirty train."

there was no thought in helen's mind, despite her decision to make a
secret trip into the city, of risking the heavy and perilous traffic of
new york. her plan was to run the car across country to white plains,
and there board the boston & westchester interurban electric. in this
way, she reasoned, she would avoid the grand central station and the
possibility of getting back on the same train with her husband.

how the most cunning of plans go astray!

after a reluctant leave-taking--reluctant on kirklan's part--he went
downstairs with the idea of getting joan to drive him down to the
station and bring the car home, but joan was nowhere in evidence, so
he had to call on billings, who looked after the grounds and who could
drive in an emergency. billings was a silent, taciturn sort of fellow,
and this silence suited gilmore's mood exactly.

helen's attitude worried him; her discontent alarmed him. suddenly it
occurred to him that in the two days since joan's return he had seen
his stepsister only at dinner and a few minutes afterward. thinking it
over, he wondered if joan had been quite her usual, jolly self; if she
had purposely avoided him.

gilmore felt guilty about taking joan's room, but it is hard to deny
a wife of a few days, and helen had actually demanded it. it never
entered his mind that there might be some other reason, a deeper, more
vital reason for joan's attitude--that she feared, until the first
shock of it had passed, she might unwittingly let him see into her
heart. he made up his mind that on his return he would have a talk
with joan and let her know how sorry he was about the room.

a few minutes after billings let him off at the station, the train
rushed in from the north, and gilmore got aboard. during the
forty-five-minute run to new york he remained depressingly thoughtful.

"i guess, at that, it's a bit dull for helen at greenacres--and will be
even more dull when i've got to lock myself in with my work. i ought to
have some company down, i suppose, to liven things up for her a bit.
i'll see who i can drum up for the next week-end."

this decision gave him a feeling of relief, as it automatically solved
the problem of his wife's discontent with rural life.

arriving at grand central station, gilmore took a taxi to the office
of his publishers and, less than half an hour later, was in conference
with atchinson regarding the unfinished novel. the latter was a dynamic
sort of fellow, a voluble enthusiast, and their talk lengthened until
it was past one o'clock. he had read the carbon copy of what had been
written and felt that it promised to have a greater success than
"rogue's paradise."

"we've decided to try illustrations with this book of yours," atchinson
was explaining. "i've selected victor sarbella to do the job. sarbella
draws splendid pictures--faces with life and character in them. he's
one of those intense fellows. half italian, you know, although his
mother was an american. you've met him, of course?"

gilmore nodded. "yes, i know sarbella; interesting chap; and, say, that
gives me an idea. i had been thinking of having some people down to
greenacres. helen is finding it a bit lonesome. wouldn't it be a good
idea to have sarbella come out?"

atchinson beamed. "that's fine! he can pick out some of the dramatic
situations with you and get the spirit of your characters. he's
devilish slow in turning out work, and i don't want to run any chances
of spoiling the drawings by rushing him. suppose we call him up right
now and get that part of it settled."

word became action, as the publisher reached for the telephone and
asked the firm's private switchboard operator in the outer office to
get victor sarbella's apartment for him. a few minutes later the matter
was arranged, and atchinson glanced at his watch.

"phew!" he whistled. "half past one, old man; we'd better hurry out and
have a bite of lunch. speaking of italians, what do you say to one of
those italian feeds? i'm always digging up new places to eat and i've
run across a splendid little restaurant, where the food's uncommonly
good even if the location is poor--in the upper forties."

kirklan gilmore agreed indifferently. "most anything will suit me," he
said.

the two left the publishing-house building, and, atchinson talking
almost incessantly and not always to the point, they started out.

"suppose we leg it," suggested gilmore; "it may give me a little zest
for lunch."

"i'm for that," atchinson said heartily; "it's only a dozen blocks."
how many things hinge on trifles! as they neared eighth avenue, passing
along this cheap and squalid street, which one found it hard to
believe was so near to pretentious broadway. atchinson's emphatic voice
jarred to an abrupt stop, his hand caught at the novelist's arm.

"hello!" he exclaimed. "isn't that mrs. gilmore yonder?"

"you mean my wife? oh, that's impossible. where?"

but his eyes had looked too late. the woman atchinson had seen was
gone, disappeared swiftly into one of those grimy, ugly entrances
before he could so much as glimpse her.

"i'd take my oath that was mrs. gilmore," muttered the publisher,
giving a puzzled stare at the sign across the way which announced,
"furnished rooms. rates $3 weekly and up." since helen had worked in
the publishing office for two months, he felt certain he had not been
mistaken.

"that's ridiculous!" snorted the author. "she took the car and motored
out to tuxedo. besides, what would helen be doing in a neighborhood
like this?"

atchinson, feeling very uncomfortable, was wondering precisely the same
thing. "humph!" he grunted. "i must have been mistaken; yes, no doubt i
was. some one who looked like her."

but this was friendly diplomacy; he had got a square look, and he knew
quite positively that he had not been mistaken. the woman who had
hurried, almost furtively, into the cheap, unclean lodging house was
kirklan gilmore's wife!




                              chapter iii

                       helen answers her letter


entirely unaware that she had been observed, helen gilmore slipped
furtively into the dark, musty vestibule of the ugly house. there were
those unpleasant odors which accumulate in a decaying house, the smell
that suggests neglect.

the opening of the second door automatically set a bell ringing, an
unpleasant jangling that caused the woman to start and compress her
lips, shutting back the nervous gasp which rose in her throat. when she
closed the door the ringing stopped.

after a wait of a moment there came down the raggedly carpeted stairs a
slovenly and haglike female, with straggling hair of dirty gray and the
shoulders of a professional wrestler in their muscular broadness. the
face of the slattern was, until she reached the bottom of the stairs,
in the shadows. at the sight of it helen instinctively retreated a
step; she had never seen such a terrible face, she thought. a pair
of narrow red eyes looked her up and down with appraising, impudent
curiosity.

"perhaps--perhaps i've made a mistake," helen stammered. "i thought
this was the right number; i--i wanted to see don haskins."

"you ain't made no mistake," came the response in a hoarse guttural.
"he's upstairs. he told me he was lookin' fer comp'ny. guess you're the
swell sister he was tellin' me about."

"y-yes," helen answered faintly.

"go right on up, deary; it's the thoid floor--the door at the end of
the hall, the door with a busted panel, where the cops broke in. they
thought, it bein' locked, terry mooney was there, but he wasn't." her
voice broke into a peal of cackling mirth. "no, he wasn't there; he
was--somewheres else."

starting toward the stairs, helen turned, one hand resting upon the
ancient rail.

"then don is wanted by--by the cops?"

"ask him," grunted the woman with the gargoyle face; "ask him. i'll say
he is, deary."

helen went tremulously up the stairs, stumbled about the dark hallway
until she found the second flight, which was narrow and, if possible,
dirtier than the first. here the boards were loose and clattered
noisily beneath her step. reaching the third floor, a bit of sun
struggled feebly through the dust-filmed skylight and fell slantwise
across the door with the broken panel, now patched with some unpainted
strips torn from a chance packing box.

the occupant of the room had heard her approach--only a deaf man
could have failed to be notified by the clatter of the loose stairway
boards--for the door opened cautiously, and a haggard unshaven face
looked out through a widening crack. a pair of thin lips twisted back
into an unpleasant and gloating triumphant grin.

"so--so you've come, have you?" the man rasped and laughed harshly. "i
thought you would. i give you credit for havin' that much sense. real
prompt, ain't you? only mailed the letter yesterday." he moved back,
making room for her to enter. his eyes, hard and glittering, followed
her with a look of venomous hate that was at the same time one of
admiration, as if her beauty stirred him.

the room was small, dark, and unventilated, and there was the vile odor
of soured liquor that mingled nauseatingly with the stench of stale
tobacco smoke. there was a narrow, tousled bed, with the white paint
long since peeled from the metal framework, a broken-backed chair upon
which rested a bottle of homemade whisky, that the old hag downstairs
sold for ten dollars the quart.

"why did you send for me, don?" demanded helen. she was plainly
frightened. looking at him she found it hard to believe that this
haggard man was the same person she had first known as "nifty don." don
had been handsome--once.

don haskins placed the bottle on the floor and with a sarcastic
courtesy waved her to the chair.

"be seated, mrs. haskins," he sneered, and himself occupied the edge of
the bed. helen shivered, her fingers working nervously. for a moment he
sat there staring.

"you still got the looks," he muttered thickly. "i--i guess i ain't
ever goin' to get over bein' crazy about you, helen--even--even when
i'm hatin' you. his grimy hand reached out to her; his touch might have
been tender, but at her shuddering recoil his eyes blazed again, and
his fingers crushed about her white wrist until she gave a cry of pain.

"you always did think you was too good for your own kind," he snarled.
"now that i've got you where i can put on the screws, i ought to get
you sent up; that's what i ought to do with you. after what you done to
me----"

"i've done nothing to you, don. why did you send for me? you told that
woman downstairs that i am----"

"yeah, it was a good stall, tellin' 'eighth avenue annie' that i gotta
rich sister that would put up for me. see? thirty bucks a week i gotta
give the grafter for hidin' me away in this room, and ten dollars
a bottle for this rat poison she calls whisky. i owe her a hundred
now, and she won't let me skip until i pay up. if i don't pay--well,
annie fixes that by givin' the bulls a tip where i can be located.
see? that's why i sent for you--to take me outta hock." he grinned
sardonically. "when a guy's in trouble, ain't it the most natural thing
in the world that he turns to--to his wife."

helen shivered. "i'm not your wife!" she cried. "you know i'm not. i've
never been your wife!"

"the law says different," retorted don haskins. "you married me, didn't
you?"

"yes," helen admitted bitterly, "i married you. i liked you, and when
you got into that trouble i--i thought i loved you. it was only pity.
you rushed me into it so that i wouldn't have to testify against you--a
wife can't be made to testify against her husband. i knew, before you
got out of the tombs, that i'd made a mistake."

this revival of old and bitter memories convulsed don haskins' face
with anger.

"you lie!" he gritted. "when y' say i married you just to keep outta
stir, you lie. i married you because i was crazy about you. you liked
me, too, until--until you run into that other bird and fell for him.
but when i got outta the tombs i stopped that, all right."

"yes, you stopped it," choked helen. "i loved him--with every beat of
my heart. you--you robbed me of my one chance to be happy. you--oh, why
do you drag all these ghosts before me? those are things i'm always
trying to forget. i saved you from doing a twenty-year stretch, and
you've been hounding me--hounding me ever since. that--that's your idea
of gratitude!"

"aw, cut out that stuff. i'm desperate. the cops is lookin' for me; i
gotta make a get-away and i gotta have money."

"oh, i see, you want money," nodded helen, fumbling at her purse. "you
said a hundred dollars----"

don haskins gave a contemptuous sneer.

"i said that's what i owe annie, but i want more'n that--a lot more.
aw, i know you're well fixed. i know you married a guy that's got it. i
got all the dope on you, see."

"how----"

"you thought you were pretty foxy, didn'tcha? it wasn't much trouble
gettin' a line on you. when i went out west with keegan and got nabbed
pullin' the job we went out there to do in chi, you thought i was in
for a long stretch, and that you'd lose me. you changed your name, did
the workin'-girl stunt, and hooked a live one--married a fellow that
writes, kirklan gilmore.

"but the state's attorney out there made a little deal with me; i
handed him some information he wanted, and he got me paroled. see? i
come back, lookin' for you. madge knew all about it, and i made her
tell. never trust a friend, girlie; that's my motto."

"so madge told you?"

"she hadda tell; i'd have choked the life outta her if she hadn't."

"i--i suppose the past is one thing that never dies," helen whispered.
"i was a fool to think i could get away with it. i--i was a fool to
take the chance."

"i ain't gonna stop you from gettin' away with it," grunted don; "at
least i ain't--providin'----"

"don't beat around the bush, don; get to the point. providing--what?"

"i'll get to the point fast enough. i gotta be practical, i oughtta
make you squirm, but i'm in a bad fix. what i need is a thousand bucks,
and i need it quick."

helen stared at him fixedly.

"i haven't got a thousand dollars, don, but if two hundred will help
any----" her fingers were at the clasp of her hand bag.

"if you ain't got a thousand, then get it--from that rich husband
you've swung onto."

"but he's not rich. you don't understand. he owns a house, an
automobile, and lives well, but he's not rich. i doubt if he's got much
money outside the royalties from his book. i--i don't see how i could
ask him for a thousand dollars, without giving him some sort of an
explanation, and i don't know what i could tell him."

"he ain't rich?" don broke in skeptically. "say, whatcha tryin' to hand
me? if he ain't rich, whatcha marry him for--and risk doin' a trip for
bigamy? stuck on the guy, huh?"

helen shook her head.

"n-no," she faltered. "i'm not 'stuck' on him. i wish to heaven that i
hadn't married him--now." her lips twitched. "i--i suppose it looked
like a chance to be respectable. i heard that you were in trouble
out in chicago, that you'd been put away for a long time. i took up
typewriting after tilliston's cabaret closed; i changed my name and got
a job with a publishing house."

"yeah, i got all that from madge."

"oh, what's the use going into the rest of it? i don't like to work;
i never did. i met gilmore. he was wild about me--still is. it seemed
like such a wonderful chance, the wife of a famous novelist. i wonder
what he'll do if he ever learns the truth? perhaps--perhaps--he'll kill
me!"

"aw, can that stuff," growled don haskins. "conversation don't help me
any; what i want is that thousand bucks--quick. i'm due for a long trip
up the river--or worse--if i don't jump town before the bulls nail me.

"i was in on a loft job. it was a water haul--not a ten-dollar bit
between the three of us that was in on it. one of the birds got nabbed,
and i know he's got a yellow streak in 'im as wide as fifth avenue.
the cops won't have to more'n bounce a nightstick over his head when
he'll come through with a squeal. i gotta get outta town, put distance
behind me, because"--his voice sank to a low, hoarse whisper--"because
the watchman got croaked, see! it--it's a chance of the chair, if 'dago
mike' squeals on the other two of us.

"a guy ain't got no chance doin' a slide outta town these days unless
he's well heeled. i'm flat broke. do i get that thousand from you,
or----"

"say it, don."

the man's eyes were narrowed.

"or do i drop a note to gilmore, tellin' him that his wife's got two
husbands, that if he'll taxi over to borough hall in brooklyn and
look over the marriage-license records for october tenth, nineteen
sixteen----"

"you--you wouldn't do that to me, don?" helen's face was deathly white.
"you ungrateful rat----"

"if i'm a rat, then it was you made me a rat!" gritted the man. "when i
got outta the tombs that time and found you'd throwed me over, and was
trailin' around with that swell with the eyetalian name, it made a bum
outta me. if i could have got my hands on you that first night----" his
hands darted toward her, extended fingers twitching convulsively, as
they neared her throat. with a stifled scream helen protected herself
with her arms.

"don't! don't! don't look at me like that. i'll try to get the thousand
dollars, but i don't know what--what i will tell him."

"it's up to you what kind of a song and dance you give 'im," he
growled. "the big thing is--get it. it's that, or else----now pass over
that two hundred you was talkin' about; that'll help a little."

helen's fingers trembled as she reached into her hand bag for the roll
of bills. "even if i give you the thousand dollars, i suppose i'll
always be at your mercy--that you'll always be coming back for more,
that you'll hound me, blackmail me----"

haskins made no promises as to that; he grabbed the money avidly from
her hand and counted it eagerly. ten dollars lacking two hundred.

"when do i get the rest of it?" he demanded. "i can't wait long; it
won't be safe--stayin' here with eighth avenue annie."

helen considered swiftly. "this--this is monday," she said. "i may be
able to get it by wednesday. if i can get it at all i suppose i can get
it by then. you--you'll give me until wednesday?"

"ain't got no jewelry that you can put in soak to raise the jack?" don
wanted to know.

"he--he would miss that, what little there is. i'd better try to get
the money from him--if i can."

haskins' lips twisted unpleasantly. "you better," he grunted
threateningly. "aw right, i'm givin' you until wednesday, but if you
ain't come across with it by then, i'll saunter out to that swell place
i hear you're livin' in--and collect."




                              chapter iv

                         "what does it mean?"


returning from new york on the five o'clock train, kirklan gilmore
stood for a minute or so on the station platform, looking along the
assembled line of cars in which thoughtful wives were meeting their
city-working husbands. he felt disappointed and hurt that helen had not
come for him, especially as this was his first absence.

then it occurred to him that she might not have returned from her drive
across the river; the country roads might have lured her farther than
her announced destination of tuxedo. a worried frown appeared over his
eyes, as his imagination led him to take the unpleasant possibility
that, since helen was new at the steering wheel, there might have been
an accident. a horrifying picture of a collision, his beautiful wife
maimed, cut, bleeding, arose before him, but he brushed it aside with a
shudder.

"i suppose all doting husbands do a lot of unnecessary worrying," he
told himself. "i couldn't stand losing her."

gilmore did not for a moment believe that it had been helen whom
atchinson had seen on the street in new york; he considered it a bit of
a joke on the publisher and intended having a good laugh by teasing his
wife about her "double."

the village of ardleigh is small, and, since it is surrounded with
people owning their country homes and their own cars, there is small
demand for taxicab service. there were just three of the ramshackle
vehicles, but gilmore delayed so long that the last one was occupied
and started in motion, as he crossed the platform toward it.

except that it might delay him getting to helen, he felt no annoyance
over this incident; it was only two miles from the village to
greenacres, and he often made the trip on foot by choice. it was a
splendid, picturesque walk, which to him had never lost its charm.

carrying his manuscript case of black leather, he swung off briskly,
choosing the dirt road rather than the paved highway; this not only
afforded the more scenic view, but also saved him nearly a quarter of a
mile. he was in a hurry for, try as he would, he could not help being
rather anxious about helen and her safe return.

the road ran along the backbone of a ridge, so that, while still some
distance from the house, he was able to get a glimpse of the driveway
through an opening in the trees, and he gave a breath of relief as he
saw the car. his anxiety had been quite unfounded; his wife was home.

approaching the house itself, he saw joan on the lawn teaching tricks
to the new collie pup, and she was so engrossed with the task that she
failed to hear the crunch of his shoes on the gravel.

"hello, joan!" he called cheerily.

the girl, on her knees in the grass, dropped the puppy's paws and
turned half toward him, the drooping brim of her hat shielding
whatever expression may have been in her dark eyes.

"hello, kirk," she answered, getting to her feet.

"i see helen's got home. i was just a little worried about her--she
being new about driving the car."

"yes, she's home," nodded joan. "she drove in about five minutes ago;
i think you'll find her dressing for dinner." she essayed a brief and
fairly successful laugh. "i won't keep you, kirk; i know you'll be
anxious to see her after being away from her all these hours."

gilmore hesitated for a moment. "see here, joan," he protested, "i
believe you're trying to get away from me. somehow i've got the feeling
that you've been trying to avoid me ever since you got back from your
trip. you haven't told me a thing about it."

"i--i didn't think you'd want to be bothered; all your time belongs to
helen. i've thanked you for the glorious treat, haven't i? i know i
intended to."

"there are no thanks due, joan; you earned it--and more. atchinson was
speaking of some passages in 'rogue's paradise' only to-day, and, bless
your life, most of them were yours!"

"it's nice of you to say that, kirk," she murmured lifelessly; he would
never know--must never know--what a labor of love it had been. there
was an uncomfortable pause, during which gilmore fumbled at his watch
chain, and joan bent over to pull gently at the puppy's ears.

"i guess there's something else i ought to say," he floundered. "i feel
mighty guilty about helen taking your room. i don't blame you for
being hurt about it. i did my best to make her understand, but----"

"we'll not talk about that, kirk. the house belongs to you; it was
quite within your right. i'll get accustomed to my new quarters, and it
will be all right, kirk--quite all right."

it was strange that gilmore, whose books were considered to contain
keen analysis of the human emotions, should have missed the catch in
her voice, the touch of pathos, as she tried to mask her true feelings
with a careless, matter-of-fact tone. but miss them he did, and he felt
relieved that she was being such a good sport about it.

"it's like you, joan," he said warmly, "to take it like that, and i
wish you'd try and make things as pleasant as you can for helen. she
still feels strange, and, i suppose, is overly sensitive. this is just
between you and me, understand, but she has a notion that there is a
feeling of antagonism, even among the servants, toward her. of course
that's ridiculous; no one could help loving helen. she is wonderful,
isn't she?"

joan could not force the polite falsehood to her lips, but gilmore
rushed on, taking no cognizance of her silence.

"i've been honeymooning for the past three weeks, joan, but i've got
to get back into harness again--a very good simile, since my studio is
a renovated stable--and rush the book to a finish. i've got to lock
myself in and work.

"well, i'm afraid helen is going to get pretty lonesome unless some one
looks after entertaining her a bit. atchinson has arranged with victor
sarbella--you remember meeting sarbella in town, of course--to draw the
illustrations for my coming book, and he'll be out to-morrow for a stay
of several days. he'll have time for loafing, while i'm working, and
i wish you'd see to it that things are made as jolly as possible for
helen.

"it's partly selfishness that i don't want country life to pall on
helen; i've got to make her contented with greenacres, or she'll be
pulling me away from the old place and into town."

joan's lips tightened. kirk did not know, of course, how much he was
asking of her. "you'd better be getting in to helen," she said.

and when gilmore had gone, striding swiftly to the house, joan sheridan
dropped to her knees in the grass, hugging the collie pup close, the
one living thing she would have permitted to see the tears now flooding
her dark eyes.

"oh, laddie, boy," she whispered into one of the inquiringly cocked
ears, "it's so hard to pretend--so hard! oh, how i hate that woman--how
i hate her! i didn't know there was so much hate in me."

kirklan gilmore entered the house and went directly upstairs. a moment
later he was rapping at the door of his wife's room and, after her
muffled response from the other side of the panel, he went in.

helen was not, as he expected, dressing for dinner. she sat by the
window in a listless, preoccupied attitude, and she had not so much as
removed her hat. her greeting was not that spontaneous explosion of
welcoming joy that he would have liked after their first parting, even
of the brief hours.

"hello, kirklan," she said listlessly. "how's everything in new york?
hot, wasn't it?"

gilmore kissed her eagerly, but found her even more than usually
unresponsive.

"not so hot," he answered, "but the humidity was stifling. what's
wrong, helen? you look all out of sorts."

"just tired, i suppose," she said. "driving a car is a strain on the
nerves."

"yes, it is for a beginner; you shouldn't attempt such long trips until
you're more accustomed to the wheel. have any trouble?"

"i stalled the motor on a hill, but i just put on the emergency brake
and worked the starter. that's what you told me to do in a case like
that."

"good headwork, helen. the truth is, i'd worried about you a good deal.
if anything had happened to you, my darling----" his voice choked,
husky with emotion, and he put his fingers softly to a strand of bronze
hair that had broken prison from under the edge of her hat.

when a man is in a soft mood, that is the best time for a wife to ask
what she wants. helen realized this and decided not to delay the matter
of the needed thousand dollars. so she reached up and let her hand
close about his.

"kirklan," she said, "i--i am worried about something. i am ashamed to
come to you with it, but----"

a look of alarm came into gilmore's face, as he waited for her to
continue.

"oh, kirklan, i--i am so--so ashamed. it's money."

he gave a quick, relieved laugh. "and it hurts your pride to ask your
husband for a little shopping money. since you feel that way about it,
i suppose we'd better decide on a regular allowance. no doubt you'd
like to have your own little bank account. i'll be as generous with
you as i can, dear, but, as i told you before we were married, i'm no
bloated capitalist. the royalties from the last book are coming in
pretty regularly now, although we hope they'll be even larger. the
sales seem to be growing. did you have your mind set on any particular
amount? don't be timid about it, honey; if it's more than i can stand
i'll have to tell you so."

"there--there are so many things i need, kirklan; sometimes a man
doesn't understand about a woman's wardrobe. i've been afraid you would
think i am extravagant, and i don't want to be a burden on you." it had
been in her mind to manufacture some past debt, but his suggestion of
an allowance seemed to make it easier.

"how much do you want, helen? you fix the amount, and, if i've got it,
it's yours." then, as she still seemed to hesitate, he suggested a
figure that to his mind was generous. "suppose i deposit five hundred
in the village bank to start with? by the time you've checked against
that, i'll have some more money coming in."

"i--i'd like to have a thousand dollars, kirklan. does that seem a
great deal? of course i won't have to ask you for any more for--oh, for
quite a long time."

gilmore was not displeased with her, but he was chagrined, for the
reason that his own bank balance was three hundred dollars less than
the thousand.

"store accounts, of course!" he said. "i've charge accounts at several
of the stores in new york, and you can buy what you want and charge it
to me. the truth is, dear, that i haven't got a thousand in cash. we
writer fellows aren't very good financiers and i've been living pretty
close to the last dollar. but my credit is good."

helen bit her lip. "i'd rather not charge things, kirklan. if it would
be just as convenient to let me have the cash----"

"i'll let you have it friday," he agreed; "i'll drop a note to
atchinson and ask him to make me an advance. the publishing house makes
out its checks on thursday."

"kirklan," she murmured, forced to try a new line, "i'll have to tell
you the truth. i'll have to have some money by wednesday. oh, i know
it's terrible, asking you to pay my old debts, but i'm so afraid of--of
being sued that i----"

gilmore patted her shoulder reassuringly. had he stopped to think about
it, he might have considered it strange that a girl in the humble
position in which he had found her should have got into debt to the
extent of a thousand dollars, but it was helen, not he, who recognized
this possible inconsistency, and she hastened to add with that glibness
which even a poor liar may achieve in a moment of desperation: "it--it
was money that i borrowed for my sister's illness. i had to sign some
notes, and----"

"you shall have the money, helen, but the truth is always the best in
the first place, dear. i want us always to be frank with each other. i
want you to feel that you can come to me with everything. after all,
a falsehood is the most futile thing in the world. you should have
told me the exact truth about the matter from the beginning. i'll get
in touch with atchinson on the phone to-morrow and arrange it. you
shall have the money to-morrow night, but you must never lie to me,
dear--under any conditions. a lie is one of the things i find it hard
to forgive."

his tone was so gentle, his agreement to the request so prompt, and his
faith in her so unquestioning that helen was touched. it made her think
that she might almost learn to love him; impulsively she brushed her
lips to the back of his hand.

"that's good of you, kirklan; you--you'll never know what a weight
you've taken from my mind. you--you do love me a very great deal."

"better than all else in the world, helen!" he answered huskily.

there was a silence, to gilmore an enraptured silence in which he felt
closer to his wife than ever before. it seemed that suddenly there was
a new bond between them.

"what does atchinson think of the new book?" she asked him presently.
"does he think it will have the success of the last one?"

"yes, even more. he's enthusiastic--even for atchinson." his lips
parted into a smile. "speaking of atchinson, that reminds me.
he was trying to convince me that he saw you in new york this
afternoon--going into some cheap dump just around the corner from
eighth avenue."

with a startled gasp, helen's hand jerked away from the fondling caress
of his fingers and, clenched, went to her mouth. her eyes became wide
with something that was more than either surprise or bewilderment. her
gaze was fixed upon his face with a fascinated stare, and the smile
that she attempted was only a sickly grimace.

"why, kirklan! in--in new york? how silly! you know very well that i
drove the car to tuxedo."

kirklan gilmore's blood was suddenly ice; his eyes were no longer
smiling.

"great lord!" he whispered. "it's true. atchinson was right. helen,
you've lied to me; you----"

"no!" she cried in a desperate frenzy of denial. "i swear to you----"

"i see guilt in your face. i know now; i know that you were the woman
atchinson saw in new york this afternoon. what does it mean, helen?
these lies, this deceit--what does it mean?"

helen laughed hysterically.

"don't--don't be so tragic--over nothing. i wasn't in new york; you
just startled me, that's all. please don't be so silly. atchinson was
mistaken; some one who looked like me, perhaps."

but, as much as he wanted to believe her, kirklan gilmore could not
convince himself; her face had betrayed her. the blood was pounding
in his brain, and he felt that the mystery of it, the doubts, the
suspicions would certainly drive him mad.




                               chapter v

                            victor sarbella


the next morning, after a sleepless night, found gilmore haggard and
hollow-eyed. there were moments when his wife's persistent denials
almost convinced him that it was all a horrible mistake; for a
beautiful woman in tears can be most plausible at dissimulation; and
then, when trying hardest to believe her, there would come before him,
with photographic clearness, the memory of her startled face, the
sudden guilty terror in her eyes, and credulity would crumble.

he was up hours before the rest of the household, although the cook was
stirring and brewed him a cup of coffee, which he gulped mechanically
and then fled to the solitude of his studio, thinking that he might
relieve the tension by forgetting himself in his work.

that, of course was ridiculous; there was no possibility of mental
detachment with his brain in such a riotous tumult. sheet after sheet
of paper he drew before him to receive his thoughts, but, instead
of smooth sentences flowing from his pen, he found himself tracing
meaningless lines. he gave up any attempt at creation and tried
correcting, ironing out rough spots in the manuscript, where he had
left off three weeks previous, but in his present frame of mind all
spots were rough, just jumbled words. he tossed down his pen with a
violent force that crumpled the gold point and sent a spray of ink
spattering across the desk top. then he leaped to his feet and began to
pace the floor like a caged beast.

"i've got to know the truth!" he groaned. "i think i could make myself
forgive her anything, but the deceit of it is driving me mad! what
could have taken her to that place--what is she hiding from me? her
reason for wanting the thousand dollars--perhaps, that too, was a lie."

it suddenly dawned upon him how little he knew of helen's life; nothing
more than she had been pleased to tell him, and that had not been
much. she had seldom spoken of her family, and then only in a hazy,
unenlightening sort of way. he had rather got the impression that her
parents had died when she was a child, and that a shadowy, indefinite
aunt had reared her.

gilmore's love for his wife had been so blindly intense, so headlong
that it had never occurred to him to weigh these things. he had loved
her for herself, and that had been sufficient.

until long past noon he remained locked within the studio, and no one
came to disturb him. at last he could no longer endure the oppression
of four walls; the day was hot, and he had neglected to open the
windows; the air was stifling. so he flung himself out of the renovated
stable and plunged, with hardly any sense of direction, across the open
country--trying to think, trying to think!

thus he missed the arrival of victor sarbella, his artist guest; in
fact he had forgotten that sarbella was coming. it was a quarter past
four when one of the village taxis turned in at greenacres, nosed
along the driveway and, coming to a stop beneath the portico, deposited
victor sarbella and his bags beside the long, cool porch.

one did not need to hear the name to be certain of sarbella's italian
blood, for from his florentine father he had got the intense black eyes
and the tinting of skin which belong to that warm-blooded race. he was
a handsome, powerfully built man, nearing forty. his hands, as he paid
the driver, were revealed as long-fingered, tapering, such hands as
properly belong to the artist.

with a honk of the horn the taxi moved off, and victor sarbella looked
about him, his black eyes snapping with an appreciative light. the
artist in him was delighted with the charm of greenacres.

"my friend," he mused, "has a most beautiful home; a beautiful wife,
too, i am told."

attracted by the taxi's arrival, bates, the butler, shambled out across
the porch, followed by joan sheridan. joan had met him at a literary
affair in new york the previous winter, and of course she remembered
him; victor sarbella was not the kind of man that one found it possible
to forget. she met him with an outstretched hand.

"welcome to greenacres, mr. sarbella. kirk told me last night that you
were coming. i haven't seen kirk all morning, but i suppose he's at the
studio. have you seen him, bates?"

"not all day, miss joan; as you say, perhaps the studio."

joan nodded. "i'll find him, bates, while you take in mr. sarbella's
bags. he loses all track of time when he really gets to work, and he's
got to make up for three lost weeks."

"naturally my poor friend takes up hees pen like, as they say, a slave
scourged to hees dungeon," he laughed. while he had spent a good many
years in america with his mother who, following the death of his
italian father, had taken up residence in new york, there was a touch
of foreign accent in the pronunciation of certain words. his education
had been in florence, and each winter he returned there for two or
three months. "tell me, mees sheridan, is hees new wife so beautiful as
i have been told?"

joan nodded. "yes, she is beautiful, a very beautiful woman. now i'll
run and find kirk. he'll feel much humiliated that he wasn't here to
greet you. you're to make the illustrations for the new book. that's
wonderful. i've always admired your drawings; there's such intensity in
your pictures."

sarbella, bowing, murmured an acknowledgment of the compliment and
turned to follow the butler into the house and up the stairs to the
second floor. a few minutes later he was unpacking his bags, as bates
drew a tub of water for him.

"what time is dinner, bates?"

"a quarter past six, mr. sarbella."

"it is now nearly half past four," said the artist, glancing at his
watch. "every one dresses for dinner, i suppose."

"oh, certainly, sir."

"then i wish you would press my dinner coat, bates; it's badly
wrinkled. i was never good at packing. you may tell meester gilmore
that i will not come down until six. there's no sense in dressing
twice."

"quite so," nodded bates and, accepting the dinner coat, shuffled out
of the room.

sarbella took a brief plunge in the tub of tepid water, finished it off
with an invigorating cold shower, and, slipping into a light bath robe,
pulled a chair to the window and began to smoke. his thoughts evidently
took an unpleasant turn, for his eyes glowed hotly, and his muscles
tensed until his fingers crushed the burning cigarette, and the fiery
end of it smoldered odorously in the nap of the rug at his feet.

"to-day is the ninth," he smiled, half aloud; "day after to-morrow
would have been hees twenty-third birthday--andrea's twenty-third
birthday! if i could but find her, that woman, i would kill her with my
own hands! heaven curse her! she----"

the tense soliloquy of hate was interrupted by a rap at the door;
sarbella turned with a start and called, "yes, come."

kirklan gilmore, face still haggard, his eyes bloodshot, entered the
room with tumbling words of apology.

"can you forgive my discourtesy, victor?" he exclaimed. "i should have
been here to receive you. a fine host you must think me when----"

"poof! that for your discourtesy, my good friend!" broke in sarbella
with a laugh and a snap of the fingers. "we are artists, you and i;
you are an artist of the pen, and i an artist of the brush. so we
understand each other. i think nothing of it. but, my friend, what has
happened to you? your face is that of a man who is ill."

gilmore gave a jerky laugh. "it's nothing, victor--nothing. poor
night's sleep, that's all." while their friendship was a warm one, it
had never reached the point of intimacy; and to no friend on earth
would kirklan gilmore have confided the truth. "we'll have a cocktail
or so before dinner, and that will put new life back into me again."

sarbella felt certain that this was an evasion and a very thin one;
through gilmore's eyes he saw a soul in torment. but he pretended to
accept the explanation.

"the beautiful new wife, she must not see you so. it will make her
unhappy."

gilmore's lips tightened, and he hastily changed the subject.
"to-morrow, victor, we'll dig in and talk over the illustrations you
are to make. i have an idea or so, but i'll have to chase along now and
dress for dinner. did bates tell you? a quarter past six? when you've
dressed go on downstairs; we'll have the cocktails on the veranda. i'll
be down ahead of you, perhaps; i'm a regular fireman for throwing on my
clothes."

and he bolted abruptly from the room. victor sarbella stared after the
closed door and shook his head slowly.

"ah!" he murmured. "a poor night's sleep, he says. i fear it is nothing
so simply remedied as that. it was tragedy i saw in his face--tragedy.
we all have our tragedies; i, too, have had mine. poor andrea; he was
so young to die. and our mother----" he blinked back the moisture
which flooded his eyes and tossed off the bath robe of silk crape,
starting to get into his clothes. before he had finished, the butler
returned with the freshly pressed dinner coat, uttered a few polite
banalities, and departed.

sarbella smoked another cigarette and then went downstairs to the
veranda, where he found that gilmore had preceded him, looking a little
less pale than some minutes before. but the color in the author's
cheeks was plainly artificial, induced no doubt by a nip or so from the
bottle of liquor with which he was engaged in mixing the cocktails.
the man was making a supreme effort to conceal the true state of his
feelings, and being only moderately successful at it.

"the ladies will be down in a moment," said gilmore, moving the
cocktail shaker back and forth. "joan tells me that she saw you when
you arrived. great admirer of your work, joan; she's tickled to death
that you're going to do the drawings for the book. she'll probably help
you pick out some of the dramatic high spots; she knows the manuscript
forward and backward. here's my mother now; i hear her coming through
the hall."

victor sarbella turned to greet mrs. gilmore, kirklan's stepmother,
whom he had not met before.

"mother, this is mr. sarbella. further introductions are unnecessary,
victor, because she's heard all about you."

as sarbella bowed over her hand, joan joined them.

"i think you can fill the glasses, kirk," she said with a glance at the
tray. "helen was directly behind me, as i came down the stairs. you
know, mr. sarbella, we're terribly punctual about dinner. the way the
servants do discipline us these days!"

the screen door onto the porch opened again, and helen gilmore came out
quietly, almost listlessly.

kirklan was filling the last glass. "victor, i want you to meet my
wife; helen, this is mr. sarbella--the artist, you know," he said.
"perhaps i neglected to tell you that he was expected."

there was a pause.

the polite, formal smile on the artist's lips was washed away by a
tidal wave of emotion--surprise, incredulity, horror--which left his
face white and rigid; into his eyes there blazed a scorching fire of
hatred that, since his back was toward the others, was seen only by
helen.

at mention of his name helen had stopped, her own features ghastly;
but she quickly checked the startled gasp which rose in her white
throat and, by the most tremendous effort, managed to control herself.
however, her agitation escaped neither her husband nor joan; both of
them sensed what a dramatic shock the meeting had been to her.

sarbella mastered his emotions wonderfully, and he came of a race that
is essentially emotional. and while he could not hide the pallor of his
face, he did mask that first flash of hatred which had blazed in his
eyes. yet he dared not trust his tongue. silently he bowed.

kirklan gilmore's unsteady hand splashed the last cocktail all over the
tray.

"perhaps--perhaps you've--met before?" he suggested, alarmed by what
was obviously an attempt to conceal a mutual recognition.

"no," answered victor sarbella, his voice husky despite himself, "mrs.
gilmore and i have never met until this moment. it is a circumstance
that i very much regret."

"mr. sarbella," said helen, an almost hysterical catch in her voice,
"is a total stranger. the name startled me. it is such an unusual name,
and i once had a--a friend who----"

"dinner is served!" announced bates. he said it quietly enough, but it
was like a thunderclap, this interruption.

"here's how!" cried joan, picking up her cocktail glass. "you'll go a
long way before you find anything like this, mr. sarbella; it's some of
the old stock that kirk's father had in the cellar--oh, years and years
ago." it served to break the tension. "here's to the new book--may it
be a tremendous success!"

"great gods!" sarbella said under his breath, as he mechanically lifted
his glass. "it is she--the woman! i find her here, the wife of--of my
friend. merciful heaven, his wife!"




                              chapter vi

                             in the studio


there can be nothing so dismal as pretended gayety, nothing so
mirthless as hollow, empty laughter. after that startling encounter
between victor sarbella and helen gilmore, both of them fighting for
self-control, all five on the porch drank the toast that joan had
offered in an attempt to save the situation. joan, of course, could not
know what it was all about, but she sensed the ominous trend of things.
she had seen the look of frozen terror in helen's face, had seen the
muscles bulge and rise beneath the shoulders of sarbella's perfectly
fitting dinner coat, and, while she had not glimpsed his face, it was
easy to know that he, too, had experienced a distinct shock.

"i have not tasted a better cocktail since my last trip abroad,"
exclaimed the artist, forcing a smile to his face. as a matter of fact,
he had swallowed the drink mechanically, hardly tasting it.

"now for dinner!" cried joan, taking full command of things. putting
her fingers on sarbella's arm, she led the way into the house and
toward the big, old-fashioned dining room.

kirklan gilmore jerked himself together with visible effort; his
impulse was to dash forward, face his wife and his friend squarely,
demanding sternly, "what does this mean? answer me! what does this
mean?" but good breeding demanded restraint; his obligations as a host
required a simulated appearance of naturalness. with a queer mental
offshoot he wondered how he would have made one of the characters in
his books behave under a similar circumstance.

a moment or so later the five were at the dinner table. even mrs.
gilmore, whom nature had endowed with no large store of astuteness,
realized the strain, realized that something was tremendously amiss,
and she, poor and well-meaning soul, made matters all the worse by the
uneasy, inquiring glances that she cast about the table in nervous
bewilderment.

victor sarbella managed to carry things off with fairly commendable
grace, but not so with helen gilmore, who made clumsy mistakes with
the table silver and not once lifted her eyes either to her husband or
the others. the rouge on her cheeks made the paleness nothing short of
ghastly.

kirklan gilmore's eyes, slightly narrowed and brighter than they should
have been, shot quick, queer glances from his wife to his guest.
perhaps it was but natural that his mind swept to one conclusion--a
previous affair between these two. his friend and his wife! the salad
fork trembled in his hand. time after time he suppressed the impulse to
leap to his feet, voicing the demand that kept shrieking through his
mind: "what is there between you two?"

only joan's persevering diplomacy kept them at fairly even keel; she
rattled on with scarcely a halt. but the dinner was a thoroughly
miserable affair, and by the time it came to an end the nerves of the
five were raw.

joan's heart ached for the suffering she saw in kirklan's face, and
there swept through her an intensified hate for the woman who had won
the man she loved.

"she's going to wreck his life!" she said under her breath. "i know
it--i know it! she's killing him--killing his soul! if she does that,
i'll----" the thought that came into her mind frightened her, for she
had not known that there was so much of primitive passion in herself.

the moment the unhappy dinner came to an end, helen gilmore murmured an
almost incoherent something about a headache and fled upstairs to her
room. the other mrs. gilmore, too, faded out of sight, still wondering
what it might be all about. joan was inclined to remain, but kirklan
showed very plainly that she wasn't wanted.

"run along, joan, if you don't mind," he said in a jerky, strained
voice. "sarbella and i"--it was to be noted that he had dropped the
more cordial and customary name of victor--"are going to--to talk
things over. come out to the studio with me, sarbella; the manuscript
of the book is out there."

victor sarbella was not deceived into any notion that gilmore had in
mind a discussion of the new novel, and, while he shrank from what he
felt sure was going to be a cross-examination, he did not see how he
could very well refuse.

"all right," he agreed with a nod, reaching for his cigarette case.
silently the two men left the house and cut across the lawn through the
gathering dusk toward the studio. no word was spoken as they entered
the building and mounted the stairs to the writer's workroom above.
kirklan gilmore switched on the lights, and the two faced each other at
the desk strewn with pages of the manuscript. sarbella remained calm,
but the other let himself go, and his whole body shook like a man in
the grip of a chill.

"well, let's have it--the truth!" he rasped, almost a sobbing catch in
his voice.

victor sarbella finished off his cigarette with a long puff that slid
the burning edge of the tobacco tube close to his lips; at the same
time he reached for a fresh smoke, tapped it on the back of his hand,
and then lighted it with the stub of the old. a thin trickle of smoke
swam slowly through his parted lips.

"just what do you mean?" he parried.

"don't you fence with me, sarbella!" gilmore shouted hoarsely. "i've
got to the breaking point. my nerves are stretched tight as piano
wires; if something snaps----"

"that's the trouble, kirklan," sarbella broke in soothingly. "you're
nervous and upset over something; that's the size of it. you were upset
when i first saw you, and i----"

"that's got nothing to do with it, sarbella. you know very well what i
mean. i saw helen--my wife--saw her face when i introduced you two on
the porch. introduced you!" his voice rose shrilly. "i guess you know
her better than i do; i saw----"

"kirklan," again interrupted sarbella, "that is where you are
absolutely wrong. i give you my solemn word of honor, my oath as a
gentleman, that until this evening i never saw mees gilmore."

"oath of a gentleman!" derided gilmore. "you're the sort who would lie
like a gentleman. man, i tell you that i saw--her face! helen, my wife,
was afraid of you. why was she afraid of you? why did her face turn so
pale? why did she look as if she were fainting?"

"she said," sarbella replied smoothly, "that it was the name--that she
had once known some one named sarbella. why couldn't that be true!"

"it could be, but it isn't. sarbella, you're hiding something from me,
and i've got to have the truth." his hands were clenched, and his eyes
blazed with jealousy. "isn't it a fact that you were once in love with
her?"

a harsh, humorless laugh, the sort of a laugh that it is not pleasant
to hear, burst through sarbella's lips.

"in love with her? great lord, no--a thousand times no! i----" he
broke off, on the verge of saying too much, of betraying the truth in
one exclamation of passionate, hot-blooded hatred. "i tell you again,
kirklan, that your wife and i never met until this very evening. that
is quite all i have to say; you must take that or leave it."

sarbella paused as if he would choke on one more word.

chest heaving, lips twitching, kirklan gilmore leaned heavily across
the table, staring into the eyes of this other man whom he had
considered his friend. suddenly he straightened and leaped toward the
door, turning the key in the lock; swiftly he turned and faced victor
sarbella.

"take it or leave it, eh?" he panted. "suppose i won't leave it;
suppose i tell you that you're not to leave this room until you tell
me what i want to know? what you are hiding from me?" his voice broke.
"i--i can't stand these lies, these evasions, this deceit any longer.
you have given me your word that you have told the truth, that you
never saw helen before to-day. i don't know whether to believe that or
not. but, if it is the truth, you know something--something about her.
in heaven's name, man, tell me! who is she? i ask you--what is she?"

victor sarbella shook his head slowly. "she is your wife," he answered,
as if that might explain why he must keep sealed lips, but gilmore
would not have it rest that way.

"yes," he groaned, "she is my wife, but who was she, what was she
before--before she became my wife? i think you know." his shoulders
shook with a dry sob. "sarbella, can't you see what this is doing to
me--that it is driving me mad?"

again sarbella's head described a sadly negative gesture. "i am sorry,
kirklan," he said; "believe me, kirklan, i am your friend, and i am
sorry, but there is nothing i can tell you. set at rest any fears you
may have had about"--his lips twitched into a bitter smile--"about any
romantic attachment between us. anything but that!"

kirklan gilmore took a step forward; the next instant he had flung
himself on sarbella, and, although he was the less powerful man, the
latter was taken off his guard and staggered back into a chair.

"you tell me what you know, and tell me now, or i'm going to kill
you!" he gritted. "tell me before i have to choke the life out of you."
his fingers squeezed about the artist's throat, and sarbella had to
fight him off to break the grip. with a tremendous heave of the muscles
he flung gilmore back, and the novelist, reeling, lost his balance and
plunged heavily to the floor.

he lay absolutely still.

victor sarbella stood over him, staring down at him pityingly. "i
am sorry for you, kirklan," he said huskily: "yes, i am sorry--very
sorry." he went to the door, unlocked it with the key, and turned,
just as gilmore was struggling up. "i cannot very well remain your
guest now, kirklan. oh, i don't mean just this." his fingers touched
his torn collar, the rumpled bosom of his dress shirt. "but i'll stay
until to-morrow. we can't forget that we are under obligations to the
publishers. yes, i will wait until to-morrow; see if you can't pull
yourself together long enough to talk things over."

gilmore gave no sign that he had heard, and victor sarbella passed on
out of the studio and down the old wooden steps of the stable. when
the door closed, kirklan gilmore slowly dragged himself to his feet
and moved toward the chair by the desk. like a rheumatic old man with
protesting bone joints, he lowered himself into the chair, his body
sagging limply forward until he lay across the desk, his face pillowed
in his arms. he lay like that, his senses numbed, almost as if he were
dead, for a long time.




                              chapter vii

                             the get-away


not for a moment did don haskins doubt that helen gilmore--legally
helen haskins, by grace of an unsundered legal tie previously
knotted--would "come through" with the thousand dollars that he had
demanded as the price of his silence. she wouldn't dare refuse; bigamy
is a sternly met crime in new york state.

with a thousand dollars to the good he felt that his get-away was
safely assured, for a thousand dollars would enable him to put a long
distance behind him. and so, sitting in the squalid, shabby little
third-floor room in eighth avenue annie's disreputable haven for those
hunted men who can raise the price of her protection, he was laying
his plans. several points of the compass beckoned to him; california
intrigued him, but he was also inclined toward cuba, and, even at a
lesser distance, florida waved its picturesque palms beckoningly before
his mental vision. he had thought, too, of south america, but was wise
enough to know that this trip would have to contemplate the dangers of
getting a passport. a passport is not readily secured by a man of don
haskins' unsavory standing as a citizen; so he scratched south america
off his list.

it had been monday afternoon when helen had called at eighth avenue
annie's, leaving a payment of one hundred and ninety dollars on
account; it was now just gathering dark of tuesday, and so certain was
don that the dawning of the following day would bring the remainder of
the thousand that he was making his very definite plans for sliding out
of town--quickly.

he had allowed his beard to grow; that would help some. perhaps it
wouldn't fool the eyes of a dick who knew him well--and many of them
did--but it added materially to his chances. the cops, since he had
no successful job to his credit, wouldn't expect him to be in funds.
the thing to do, he reasoned, was the thing he wouldn't be expected
to do; therefore with fifty of the one hundred and ninety dollars he
had got from helen--previously diminished by an even hundred that he
owed his old hag protector--he had sent annie out among the secondhand
shops of eighth avenue to gather a wardrobe, a gentleman's wardrobe, at
reasonable prices.

"nuttin' flashy," he had warned; "respectable-lookin', but none of the
race-track stuff, see."

and so eighth avenue annie went forth among the clothing shops where
stained, ancient garments are sponged, pressed, and advertised "just
like new." true enough, annie took her own reward for this service;
to the suit of blue serge for which she paid twelve dollars and
ninety-five cents, she affixed a price tag which read twenty-four
dollars and ninety-five cents, and, as you might expect, put the
difference into her own capacious and ever-hungry pocket.

there seems to be some persistent destiny that has the habit of
sending policemen past a certain spot at a certain moment. it is
always happening, as an almost daily glance at your morning newspaper
will bear affirmative witness. as eighth avenue annie was engaged in
purchasing don haskins' get-away outfit, detective sergeant john henry
tish passed the door of abramson's dark, gloomy and somewhat odorous
"clothes bought and sold" establishment and chanced to glance within.

detective sergeant tish was not perhaps nearly so good a detective as
he thought himself to be, but he had a good record for arrests and
convictions; when he made a "pinch" something usually came of it. he
had been recently assigned to this district, on the fringe of the old
tenderloin, and he wasn't so well acquainted as he might have been.
but he knew eighth avenue annie; he had seen her in jefferson market
court not a great many months before, and annie's gargoyle face, with
the narrow, red eyes, her bulging, muscular shoulders, were not easily
forgotten.

"humph!" grunted sergeant tish. "the old hag is buyin' somebody some
new rags--that is some rags that was new--one time. looks as if there
might be something in it."

so, instead of pursuing his way down eighth avenue, he loitered outside
mr. abramson's cluttered establishment, to all intents and purposes
interested in a suit of plaid which occupied the central space in the
window. "can't tell it from new," read a card. "a bargain at $22.69."
mr. abramson, you see, was a great believer in the psychology of the
odd cent.

eighth avenue annie striding forth with that swaggering, bowery walk of
hers, a bundle under her arm, did not glance behind her. had she done
so, she would have seen sergeant tish, a short, well-fed-looking man,
who didn't look much like the usual run of fly cops, lose interest in
the plaid and follow her at a discreet and disarming distance.

however, when annie turned in at her place of abode and harbored
evil-doers just around the corner of the second block, sergeant tish
quickened his pace and was directly behind her, as she stepped into
the vestibule. it might have been the ringing of the automatic bell
that dimmed her ears to the pad of the detective's shoes, for, as she
turned, there was tish, grinning at her wisely, his foot thrust forward
to prevent the door being suddenly slammed in his face. he had no
intention of finding himself on the outside looking in.

"say!" growled annie. "what's the game?" sharp as were her red,
narrow eyes, she failed to see the brand of headquarters in the
plain-clothes man's round, fat face.

sergeant tish continued grinning, but it wasn't a grin to arouse any
contagious mirth or even good humor.

"who'd you buy the new rags for?" he demanded. "i wanna know a thing or
two about that. get me?"

eighth avenue annie got him; there was the tone of authority in the
man's voice.

"what's it to you?" she demanded with pretended indignation. "ain't a
lady gotta right----"

"cheese it!" broke in detective tish. "i know you, an' i gotcher
number. when a bird sends you out to buy 'im clothes, he's either
a cripple or a crook--an' if he was that bad a cripple i guess he
wouldn't need any clothes." he chuckled in appreciation of his own wit.
"so don't try no bluff with me. take your hand off that door."

annie had often defied the law, but her defiance was never flaunted
openly. when a cop said open the door, she opened it quickly.

"i ain't done nothin' wrong," she protested with a ludicrous pretense
at innocence. "there ain't nothin' wrong, is there, in doin' a favor
fer a gent roomer. is there, now? he said fer me to go out an' buy
'em----"

"where is this guy?" broke in sergeant tish. "i guess i'll give him the
once-over. chances are he's some bird that's wanted, tryin' to do a
swift one outta town. yeah?"

"i dunno," muttered annie; "i dunno nothin' about 'im. i rents 'im
a room; he pays his rent. i'm a poor lady tryin' to make an honest
livin', i am."

"that's a double lie," snorted sergeant tish. "you ain't no lady, an'
you never glommed an honest jitney in your life. lead on, you; i'm
gonna give this guy the once-over an' a free ride most likely."

the woman hesitated, for she was at a ticklish disadvantage. the
surprise of the detective's visit was too complete to give her any
opportunity to warn don haskins who waited in the vile little room on
the third floor for his new wardrobe.

on the stairs leading to the top story there was concealed a very
cunning little device that in six years of hiding hunted men for pay
had not once been detected by the police. two of the steps, by a simple
mechanical operation, could be jerked upward into an opening large
enough to admit a man's body. below this was space large enough to
accommodate several persons, the steps then dropped back into place,
looking thoroughly innocent. but haskins had not been given the secret
of the third-floor stairs, and now there would be no opportunity to
favor him with this belated knowledge.

"i'll run right up an' tell mr. smith to come down," said the old hag.

"say," sneered sergeant tish, "do i look that easy? on the level, do
you think i'd fall for that stuff?" it angered him that she should
have so little regard for his intelligence. "what floor did you say?"
he unbuttoned his coat which fitted somewhat tightly across his ample
stomach, giving him freer access to his police automatic strapped
beneath his arm.

eighth avenue annie had not lived in the underworld for nothing; she
knew the ways of the cops. she knew, for example, that the first overt
move she made to protect her well-paying lodger would land her in jail
on a charge of aiding and abetting a criminal. she wanted to help
haskins, not from any motive of sentiment, but because she expected to
garner further money from don's "swell sister," as she supposed helen
gilmore to be.

"i didn't say what floor, off'cer," she muttered, "but i'm sayin' now.
he's on the thoid. i ain't protectin' nobody that ain't right." she
tried to affect a virtuous attitude. "i dunno nothin' except he spiels
it to me his moniker is--um--smith."

"lead the way," ordered sergeant tish. "not a word outta you either.
get me? no tip-off goes with me; try that, and it's the station for
yours. if you think i won't, try it." evidently tish had not been
deceived in the slightest by her attitude of innocence. "you go on up
them stairs just like you was bringin' back his new duds. you say,
'here's your clothes, mister.' i guess we won't use the smith racket,
either. his name ain't smith, and you know it ain't."

"yes, off'cer," agreed eighth avenue annie.

"not so loud with that officer talk," warned tish. "ease down on the
lung power, you. now, let's go."

he motioned to the bundle she had just brought in from abramson's,
and she obediently picked it up, starting up the dank, musty stairs.
the detective followed, walking with surprising lightness of step for
so corpulent a man. they reached the second-floor landing and passed
around a bend in the hall to the next flight. there was no hope for don
haskins now.

as they reached the top, lighted murkily by the dirty skylight,
sergeant tish crouched low so that his head and shoulders would be
shielded by the bulking form of eighth avenue annie and her packages.
the woman's shoes clattered noisily, and haskins came to the door with
the broken, patched panel, his unshaven face peering out.

"you got the stuff, huh?" he grunted. "i'll bet it's a tin suit."

eighth avenue annie made no effort to warn him; that might mean
shooting, and she wanted no shooting in her house.

"it's a good suit," she muttered in a hoarse guttural. "it cost----"

"stick 'em up," roared sergeant tish, flipping out his gun, and rising
to his full height, leveling the weapon at the now wide-open door. "get
'em up, or i'll drill you."

don haskins' hands went up; he would have been a fool otherwise. his
lips twisted, as they emitted a vicious snarl.

"double crossed me," he said. "took my good jack an' called in the
cops. curse you, i'll----"

"shut your mouth!" annie whispered hoarsely, her own face livid.

sergeant tish grinned delightedly; he was beginning to realize that it
had been a fortunate circumstance looking so casually into the doorway
of abramson's secondhand clothing store. he had felt all along, of
course, that the woman was lying, that she was keeping a man in hiding.
and men do not hide unless they are wanted. it might be a big haul.
he took another step forward and peered closely into the face of his
quarry.

"i can't name him offhand, but i guess the bertillon boys'll rap to
'im fast enough." he backed haskins into the stuffy, dirty little room
at the point of the gun and reached into the pocket of his coat for an
ever-ready pair of nippers.

"stick out them fins," he ordered. "i'll get these darbies on you, an'
then we'll talk things over."

knowing that the gun was beaded for his vitals, and that any fool can
shoot straight with an automatic, don haskins stuck out his hands; the
handcuffs snapped about his wrists.

"what's the pinch for?" he demanded with an effort at bluster. "you
ain't got nothin' on me; i ain't done nothin'."

"well, anyhow, i guess you've done time," sergeant tish said shrewdly.
"what's your name down at central office?"

don haskins remained sullenly silent, his eyes glowing hotly, as
they stared at eighth avenue annie. the hag had let the bundle from
abramson's slide to the floor, and with both hands she pushed back the
dirty gray hair that straggled down across her soiled face.

"want to hold out on me, eh?" grunted sergeant tish, with a shrug of
his flesh-padded shoulders, as he thrust the gun back into its holster.
his chubby face wore a smile, for he was well pleased with himself; a
single-handed capture is a thing that a cop delights in. and, if it
turned out to be an important arrest--well, tish had a hunch that it
was just that, an important arrest. "suit yourself, john doe; you'll
get the rap fast enough when i get you downtown."

don haskins knew how hopeless it was now. ten minutes ago he had been
daydreaming pleasantly of florida, perhaps cuba, and now--sing sing
via the tombs. it all depended on whether or not "dago mike," his
confederate in the loft job, net profit ten dollars split three ways,
had squealed. and he was sure dago mike had squealed. the warehouse
watchman had been croaked, and that meant that not only the actual
slayer, but don haskins, as a participant in the crime, was liable to
the death sentence.

haskins thought swiftly, desperately. the chair! the sickening vision
of it swam before his eyes and drove his brain to cunning that was
somewhat beyond his normal mental processes. he staggered back to the
unkempt cot.

"gimme a cigarette," he muttered thickly, his nerve apparently
deserting him. "i'll talk--tell you who i am. i--i gotta have a fag
first."

sergeant tish had seen that kind before. "sure," he agreed readily
enough and produced a package of his own. don lifted his manacled arms
and took a cigarette. it trembled between his fingers, wabbled between
his twitching lips. the detective lighted a match and held the flaming
stick toward him.

haskins inhaled deeply and seemed to grow calmer; his eyes raised,
taking his captor's measure. he noted with satisfaction that he was
almost a head taller than tish. even then he found the time to wonder
how he had managed to get on the force.

tish did not rush his man. "take your time," he encouraged. "no hurry;
spill it when you're ready."

eighth avenue annie edged to the door from the hall, peering inside
with a horrible leer, as she considered that this man whom she had
befriended--for pay, of course--was going to be a yellow skunk and
"cough up." he would probably squeal on her, too; tangle her up in
his own net of trouble. that was the way with some of these rats;
they couldn't stand the gaff and wouldn't protect their friends. she
muttered something that sounded like "scum."

little did annie know what was going on in don haskins' mind. don had
never been a swift thinker, and hard drinking of bootleg whisky hadn't
added to his nimbleness of wit, but his brain was traveling in high
now. he knew that it wouldn't do him any good to conceal his identity;
lie as he would, there would be plenty of cops down at headquarters to
remember him. more than that, his picture was in the rogues' gallery,
his finger prints on file. but he didn't propose to make that trip down
to headquarters. desperation made him resourceful.

"my name is haskins," he muttered. "they used to call me nifty don in
the old days, but you ain't got nothin' on me. on the level, you ain't
got nothin' on me."

sergeant tish frowned for a moment and then a look of delight spread
over his round, fat face. "guess again, haskins. there's a general
order out for you. you're wanted for a croak out in the bronx; i forget
the details, but you're wanted all right. yeah, i'll say you are."

don groaned. he had been right in his fears; dago mike had squealed.
the handcuffed man got to his feet; his shoulders heaved, as he inhaled
deeply on the now half-consumed cigarette. he filled his lungs to every
cubic inch of their capacity. he took a step toward the detective and,
opening his mouth, expelled a cloud of smoke directly into tish's face.

sergeant tish, half blinded, was taken totally by surprise; he
staggered back and made a motion toward his gun, but he was not quick
enough. the prisoner's manacled arms flashed upward and downward, the
metal wristlets catching the detective a stunning blow on the side of
the head. the latter's knees sagged, but he continued to fumble for his
gun, when haskins struck again, and this time the plain-clothes man
crumpled up on the floor, blood gushing from the edge of his scalp.

"my gawd!" whispered eighth avenue annie.

for the moment haskins ignored her, as he knelt beside the form of his
captor and took the police regulation automatic; then he began frisking
the man for the handcuff keys.

"here," he said harshly to the old hag, "get these cursed things off of
me. hurry!"

"you'se ain't croaked 'im?" gulped annie, her eyes bulging.

"naw," grunted don. "use that key, or i'll give you a dose of the same.
i ought to, anyhow, you dirty double crosser. tipped the cops off,
didn'tcha?"

"he seen me buyin' the clothes; he follered me. see? i didn't have no
chance to give you warnin'. nice fix you got me into, brainin' a dick
in my place. they'll send me away for this." she worked the key in the
lock, and the handcuffs came free.

"i hope you get ten years," haskins said viciously. "gimme them
clothes." a moment later he was changing in trembling haste, shedding
the disreputable suit for the more respectable garments that annie had
purchased at abramson's. his fingers were shaking, and he steadied his
nerves with a drink from the bottle which rested beside the bed.

eighth avenue annie was twisting her grimy old hands in an anguish
of terror. she knew the aftermath of this, and the revenge of the
outwitted detective was not a pleasant thing to consider. had she
dared she would have tried to square herself by preventing haskins'
escape, by sending out an alarm, but haskins was armed and at her first
move would perhaps kill her. she flattened against the wall, sobbing
hoarsely in self-pity, cursing the man who had sent haskins to her for
protection.

in his haste haskins forgot something very important; he forgot that
beneath the dirty mattress was the forty dollars that remained of
the one hundred and ninety dollars helen gilmore had given him the
previous afternoon. he didn't think of it until he had dashed down
the two flights of stairs and had reached the street. as he realized
this amazing oversight and turned back, he saw annie sneaking out of
the vestibule, running. he knew. she was calling the cops, trying to
square herself. he didn't dare go back for the money. he wheeled in the
opposite direction, walking swiftly.

flight without a dollar in pocket is a problem, but desperation has
cut many a gordian knot. eighth avenue is not a well-lighted street,
and darkness had settled down over the city. a taxi nosed through the
gloom, and after but a moment of hesitation haskins hailed it; the
question of fare did not bother him--not with that automatic in his
pocket. the taxi drew up alongside the curb; it was a nice new taxi,
with a shining, spotless coat of blue paint.

"i wanna get to yonkers in a hurry," said don briskly. "gotta
important date out there. how quick can y'make it?" yonkers was the
river-bordered town which joined the new york city limits on the north.

"hour and a quarter," answered the driver, giving haskins a sizing-up
look.

"o. k.," grunted haskins. "let's travel; go down riverside drive all
the way." he climbed inside, and they were off.

don had a particular reason for choosing the riverside drive route.
past one hundred and eightieth street the drive winds between the river
and high-towering bluffs, with no houses on either side. he desired a
quiet place for settling the matter of the fare. they had reached the
spot which is called inspiration point, when the fleeing passenger
rapped on the glass which separated him from the chauffeur's seat.

"stop 'er!" he shouted.

the car ground to a halt, and haskins leaped out, cursing volubly.

"lost ring--diamond ring--slipped right off my finger. that rock cost
me eight hundred bucks," was the excuse he gave.

the driver stared suspiciously, for his fare did not look like a man
who would own an eight-hundred-dollar diamond ring.

"aw, watcha handin' me?" he growled skeptically.

haskins looked up and down the drive. the nearest car was some distance
away. his hand slipped to his pocket for the automatic he had taken
from sergeant tish. at the same instant he sprang forward. he did not
shoot, but brought the butt of the weapon down in a vicious swing on
the fellow's head. with a grunting, choking groan the latter collapsed
into black unconsciousness, still sitting at the wheel.

the approaching car swept past; another followed; and neither paused
their swift progress. there was no reason why they should have noticed
anything. don haskins lifted out the limp form and carried it well
back to the side of the road, where he quickly rifled the senseless
man's pockets, taking nineteen dollars and thirty-five cents in cash,
a good watch, and the driving license. then he donned the chauffeur's
cap and climbed into the taxi; an instant later he was speeding on
northward--alone. he was headed for the one place where he was sure
that he would find money and protection--greenacres.




                             chapter viii

                           caught in the web


the wife of kirklan gilmore was not literary, had not even any
tendencies in that direction; no literary qualifications had been
required for her employment as a typist in atchinson's publishing
house. her reading had been superficial, shallow, but she had an
adaptable mind and was constantly picking up surface things, chance
clever little quips and quotations, which, if she were not put to a
severe test, might pass for an acquaintance with the classics.

when, overwhelmed by the appearance of victor sarbella as her husband's
guest, she had fled to her room, it was with the realization that still
another specter of the past had appeared to haunt and undo her. and
there flashed through her mind a fragment of an old quotation:

    oh, what a tangled web we weave,
    when first we practice to deceive.

yes, what a tangled web she had woven--inextricably enmeshed in the
snarled skeins of her ambitious folly. how circumstances had conspired
against her.

"what a fool i was to think i could get by with it!" she whispered
bitterly. "how will it end? it was bad enough without sarbella.
him--him! it was like a ghost from the grave. he will tell my husband;
of course he will tell him--he could want no better revenge than that.
that look in his eyes--how he hates me!"

she began to think of flight, even made a half-hearted, indecisive
move to gather up some of her things, but there was no train now until
morning, and the thought of driving the car, novice at the wheel that
she was, through the dark night terrified her. besides which the car
was probably in the garage, locked; and she did not have the key. there
seemed nothing to do but wait.

helen would have been a very blind person indeed had she not realized
that kirklan had sensed something amiss in the amazing meeting between
her and sarbella; and, as time dragged on--eight o'clock, nine, and
then ten--she wondered why her husband had not come raging upstairs to
fling the past accusingly into her face, to order her out of the house,
perhaps to kill her!

"surely he would come if he knew," she told herself. "hasn't
sarbella told him? why, he--he must have told him!" it was past her
understanding.

wearily she went to her dressing table, removed the dress she had
worn at dinner, slipped into a flowing-sleeved dressing gown that was
charmingly open at the throat, and began to let down her glorious
bronze hair which cascaded over her shoulders.

detached as greenacres was, the house was very still, so still that
the many sounds which always fill a country night, floated through the
window, magnified by her taut, tortured nerves to crescendo volume.

"something has got to happen. why can't it happen now and be over
with!" she moaned. "the suspense, this awful suspense! i can't stand
it--i can't!"

nervously she went to the window, and, pushing aside the curtains,
leaned out, staring into the night. the future, her future, was like
that--black, impenetrable, void, and she felt that there could never be
any dawn--not for her.

"my life's been nothing but tragedy," she told herself bitterly. "i
thought i might be happy and respectable. there's a curse on me; that's
what it is, a curse. i'd be better off dead, but--i don't want to die."

helen, staring off into black space, did not see the skulking form that
moved stealthily through the shrubbery, circling uneasily, furtively
about the house. the slinking man stared upward at the lighted window,
stopped, as she leaned out across the sill, framed in the open space by
the light which burned within the room behind her.

"it's her!" he grunted, but, as he crept forward, intending to call
softly, she disappeared.

don haskins had deserted the stolen taxicab two miles down the road; by
cautious questioning he had learned the location of greenacres and had
walked the rest of the way, and here he was. it had been a troubling
problem as to how he would get in touch with helen. he had thought of
going into the village and calling her on the telephone, but there were
objections to this plan. in the first place he did not want to risk
an appearance in the village; added to that, it might be bad business
calling her to the phone so late at night. it had been his tentative
idea to find a hiding place on the spacious estate until he could get
in touch with her. already he had considered the stable as a likely
place for his purpose.

"that's her room," he told himself, still looking up at the lighted
window. "now, if she was alone----" he crept closer to the house the
better to study the situation, and he found it very much to his liking.
the window of helen's room opened out on the roof of the veranda which
semicircled the house on two sides.

it might be risky business, but a desperate man, the prospect of the
death chair looking him in the face, does not stop to weigh such minor
risks as this. he reached an almost instant decision. he sat down in
the grass and removed his shoes; tying the laces together, he swung
them about his neck.

"i never done no porch climbin'," he muttered, "but it don't look so
hard."

but it was hard, much harder than he had anticipated; the porch post
was large of circumference, making it difficult to hug his arms about
it with a freezing grip. several times he slid pantingly down just as
his straining fingers were within a few inches of the raised awning.
the perspiration poured from his body and moistened the palms of his
hands, so that he had to keep wiping them dry.

in one last desperate effort he got hold of the awning's edge and
began to pull himself upward to the cornice. the triumph, however, was
far from noiseless; awning hooks snapped loose from the wood, and the
awning itself tore with a ripping sound under the strain.

panting, breathless, exhausted, haskins lay flat on the roof, waiting
to see if the sounds would arouse the house. he marked the time by
counting, one to sixty, one to sixty, until four minutes had dragged
past. not even helen, within the room of the open window directly
above, seemed to have heard.

haskins began edging himself, a few inches at a time, across the
shingles toward the patch of light that streamed out across the roof.
presently he had reached the sill and, drawing himself up, peered
within.

helen was again at the dressing table, mechanically applying bedtime
cosmetics. otherwise the room was empty; don made sure of that before
he pulled himself still further forward.

"sh!" he hissed. "it's me--don. douse the glim!"

helen gilmore did not turn; there was no need. through the
dressing-table mirror she could see his unshaven face at the corner of
the window sill. her hand clapped to her mouth to stem the scream which
rose in her throat. her body rocked in the low-backed chair, but she
did not faint.

"douse the light!" haskins commanded again in a piercing whisper.
"somebody might see me sneakin' in."

helen stumbled unsteadily to her feet and snapped out the lights. in
the darkness she heard him floundering through the window and into the
room, heard the curtains rip, when he caught at them, evidently to keep
his balance, as he lunged forward. she even heard his panting breath,
as it wheezed through his mouth.

don turned, lowered the sash, and drew down the blind. "lock the door
an' then flash on the lights again," he ordered tensely.

"the door is already locked," answered helen, as she fumbled for the
light switch. the next instant they were blinking at each other; she
leaning limply against the wall, he standing in the center of the
floor. "my god, don, what made you come here--to-night of all nights? i
can't stand any more; i can't. you gave me until to-morrow----"

"blame the damn cops," he grunted. "it was them did it--them an' eighth
avenue annie. she sicked 'em onto me." he still believed that the old
hag had double crossed him.

"you mean----"

"yeah, they're after me. i'm in for it right. they had the darbies on
me, but i beaned the dick that nabbed me, got 'em off, took his gat,
swiped a taxi, an' here i am. my hunch was right. dago mike squealed on
the loft-job croak."

"how did you--find me--this room?" gasped helen.

despite the desperation of the situation, don haskins grinned a little.

"seen you when you poked your head outta the window; shinned up the
porch, an' here i am."

"i--i haven't got the money, don; i haven't got it--yet."

"but you're gonna get it to-morrow? i betcha y'are." his tone was
menacing. "you gotta hide me somewheres until----mebbe you can drive me
somewheres in a car. boston, huh?"

helen lifted her hands in a weary gesture. "everything seems to be
happening at once," she whispered. "i--i don't know if i am going to
be able to get the money or not--now."

the man glowered menacingly. "don'tcha try to pull no stall on me; that
stuff don't go. understand?"

"don, listen. my husband was on the same street yesterday when--when i
went to that place to see you. his publisher saw me--the man i used to
work for."

"aw, say; you don't expect me to swallow no guff like that?"

"sh! not so loud, don. it's true. atchinson saw me. kirklan didn't
believe it at first, but now he feels sure it's true. at first he'd
promised me the money. i told him that i wanted to pay an old bill, but
i don't know what he is going to do now. then"--a shudder went through
her--"to make it all worse, a man came to the house to-night, a mr.
sarbella. he----"

haskins lifted his hand to his unshaven chin and stared at her
dubiously. "sarbella? i guess you're bats, ain'tcha? why, that guy's
dead!"

"not--not andrea," choked helen. "victor sarbella. at first i
thought--they look so much alike. he recognized me. oh, the awful look
of hatred that he gave me!"

"you mean that sarbella spilled to gilmore?"

"i--i don't know. i haven't seen any one since dinner. i--i suppose he
did. he hates me, and he wants revenge. the newspapers said----"

"that he was gonna get you," finished don. "yeah, i remember readin'
that. the papers made quite a piece about it--eyetalian revenge an'
that sort of spiel. i guess you're some scared that the sarbella guy's
gonna croak you, huh? right here in the house, is he?"

helen nodded. "yes, right here in the house," she answered.

don whistled softly. "well, if that ain't the cat's eyebrows!" he
murmured, as he stared at her suspiciously. if what she told him was
true, he probably had lost the club he had been holding over her head
to extort money from her. but he doubted if it were true; helen, he
told himself, was clever. perhaps she hadn't found it easy to get the
thousand dollars blackmail money from her husband, and she had made up
this story as a pure bluff.

"where's the gilmore guy?" he demanded.

"i don't know. i told you that i hadn't seen any one since dinner. i
can't understand why kirklan hasn't come to me, if sarbella has told
him."

haskins pursed his lips thoughtfully and wrinkled his shallow forehead;
after a moment he nodded. "i gotcha; if gilmore had the low-down on you
he'd have come stormin' in here to have it out with you. sure he would.
no, i guess sarbella ain't spilled to him. i guess that ain't his way
of gettin' even with you. stiletto! that's the way them eyetalians do
it."

helen gasped; she hadn't thought of that possibility. she was inclined
to treat the suggestion lightly, but there came back to her the memory
of victor sarbella's black eyes flaming into her face, hot with a
stored-up hatred, and she shivered.

"oh, i--i don't think he would kill me!" she gasped.

"then you don't know them eyetalians," don grunted sagely. "they sure
is strong on the revenge stuff. if i was you i'd keep right here in
this room, while he was on the premises. but that's your trouble, and i
got troubles of my own. when do i get that thousand bucks you was gonna
hand over?"

"but if sarbella has told kirklan who i am, what i was before----"

"then you figger to pass me up, huh? guess again. even if sarbella
does, gilmore won't squeal to the cops; a guy like him don't want
no family scandal, see! mebbe he'll show you the gate, but he ain't
gonna send you up the river--not if he's crazy about you like you said
yesterday. but me, that's different. you done me dirty; you throwed me
over, made a bum outta me." his face contorted unpleasantly. "i owe you
one, i do, an' i'm handin' you this on the level; if i get nabbed this
trip i'm goin' to spill. i'm gonna send for the district attorney an'
tell him----"

"i'll try to get the money for you, don; i'll try my best," broke in
helen with a quick promise.

don glared at her triumphantly, as he reached into his pocket for one
of the cigarettes that he had taken from the unconscious taxi driver,
lighted it, and, puffing slowly, began rocking to and fro on his
feet. a silly smile spread over his face, as glancing down, he saw a
bare toe protruding from one sock, where a hole had been rubbed by
friction against the porch post in his climb of a few minutes before.
he remembered that his shoes still swung from around his neck. with a
chagrined exclamation he untied the laces and put the shoes on. helen
did not smile.

"yes," she said again, "i'll try to get the money for you to-morrow."
her hands went out in a nervous gesture, and don caught the sparkle of
a diamond on her finger. she had not worn it on her visit to eighth
avenue annie's--for good reasons. haskins stared at the ring and put a
hasty appraisal of four or five hundred dollars on it.

"i'll take that for security," he said, pointing. she drew back against
the wall in a move of refusal, and don, eyes narrowed, darted toward
her.

"aw, i guess you will," he growled.

but, when his fingers touched the smooth, white skin of her arm and
seized her in an effort to force the diamond from her, a change came
over him. a fierce return of his old love for her swept through him.
all his hate melted, like ice returned to its first form of water. his
arm tightened about her, drawing closer; his unshaven, stubbly chin
buried against her throat.

"the law says you're mine!" he panted. "you're my wife. i--i guess i
ain't stopped bein' crazy about you even--even when i was wantin' to
kill you--wantin' to choke the life outta you like--like this."

the fingers of one hand raised before her face, writhing, twisting,
like tentacles; they neared her soft throat, toyed against the skin.
helen dared not scream, but she struggled in silent terror. her arms
flailed against his sides, and her hand struck against the bulky
automatic in his coat. her fingers slipped swiftly into his pocket and
seized the butt of the gun.

"you ain't this guy's wife," he went on hoarsely. "you're my wife;
the law says so, and you're goin' with me." he was so beside himself
that he did not feel the tug of the pistol, as it came free from his
pocket. and then there crashed through the stillness of the house the
slam of a closing door. don's arms dropped limp.

"what was that?" he whispered, returning to the realization that he was
a hunted man, fleeing for his life.

"i think it's kirklan," she whispered. "his room adjoins this one. sh!
he'll hear you."

haskins took a flying leap across the room and switched off the lights;
his hand went to his pocket.

"the gat--it's gone!" he muttered under his breath. "it musta dropped
outta my pocket when i was climbin' up the porch." he groped through
the darkness. "helen!"

"sh!"

"you gotta stash me away somewheres. if i get nabbed, what i said
goes--i spill what i know."

helen in the darkness concealed the automatic beneath the flowing
sleeve of her robe. with the gun she was no longer afraid of don, but
she still did fear his threats, his power to send her to auburn prison
on a charge of bigamy. a moment before he had loved her madly; the next
he might hate her again with just as much intensity. she had to aid
him--protect him.

"i'll hide you," she told him, "on the third floor--an old storeroom.
no one ever goes there. i'll bring you food. i'll try to get you the
money; i'll get you money--somehow. i'll see that you get away. follow
me."

cautiously she opened the door. the hallway was in friendly darkness.
she groped along the wall, fearful that don would betray their
presence, but he followed her in stealthy silence.

the third-floor stairway was inclosed, and it was reached through a
door which, since the third floor was seldom used, creaked dismally, as
she swung it open.

"up there!" she whispered. "the last door at the left; you'll know it.
it's a storeroom. i'll see you--some time to-morrow."

the door closed again whiningly, inclosing don haskins within the
stairway. he considered it safe to light a match and did so to
illuminate the upward climb. he saw accumulated dust, evidence of
disuse; greenacres servants were not good housekeepers above the second
floor, it seemed. without any difficulty he found the storeroom and,
striking another match, discovered that a kindly circumstance had
left a discarded couch for him to rest upon. he sat down on the edge
of it and felt in his pocket for his package of cigarettes, and then
something dawned upon him. the gun had been in his pocket after he had
got inside the house; he remembered the touch of it, as he had sought
out a cigarette.

"curse her!" he gritted. "she took that gat outta my pocket. what did
she want with it, anyhow? i got a good notion to go back down there
an'----" he lighted a fag and smoked nervously, indecisively. he wanted
his gun. a desperate man feels safer with something to shoot with, but
he could not quite make up his mind to risk a return to the second
floor.

helen had returned to her room without detection. she switched on the
lights again, but in her agitation forgot to lock the door behind her.
stunned, nervously exhausted by this new-conspiring circumstance, the
appearance of don, she sank down into a chair, and, as her arms dropped
listlessly down, the gun which a few brief hours before had been the
property of detective sergeant john henry tish of the new york police
department slid down to the rug with a faint thud and lay at her feet.
she made no move to pick it up.

she faced the door, her eyes fixed vacantly upon nothing; hopelessness
engulfed her. don--her legal husband--here. sarbella here, too. both of
them here with her under the same roof. no wonder that she was stunned,
dazed; at times she felt that she must be in the midst of a terrible
nightmare, that she would wake up with the grateful realization that it
wasn't true.

for perhaps ten minutes she sat motionless, surrendering any attempt to
think coherently. suddenly her lax nerves snapped taut, a gasp escaped
her lips, her eyes widened. there had been no sound of a footstep in
the hall, there had been no rap at the door, but the knob was turning
slowly, silently, and the door began to move.




                              chapter ix

                             the open door


the butler at greenacres occupied a small room on the ground floor near
the kitchen. he had been asleep for some time when the ringing of the
doorbell sounded, a loud jangling in the night's stillness; he stirred,
muttered grumblingly, and was about to tell himself that it must be a
mistake, when the ring was insistently repeated.

"there ought to be a law against it," he declared, as he slid his thin
old legs out from beneath the sheets, and, not more than partly awake,
fumbled groggily for the light. the clock on the bureau told him that
it was half an hour past midnight. "fine time of night for people to
go around ringing bells at respectable houses!" again the bell started
its clatter. "maybe it's an automobile accident out on the road," he
said, but he did not hurry. bates was not the hurrying kind. he reached
under the pillow for his false teeth, clicked them into his toothless
gums, and then began to pull his trousers on over the old-fashioned
nightshirt that flapped about his skinny legs.

still grumbling under his breath, he shambled down the hall, switched
on another light, and went to the front door, making sure that the
safety chain was in place before he opened it. bates did not have good
eyesight even in the daytime, and at night he was little better than
blind; squintingly he stared through the narrow crack at the form of
the man out on the porch.

"what's wanted?" he snapped complainingly.

"it's me, bates," came the answer.

"heaven bless us, it's mr. kirklan!" gasped the butler, making haste
to unfasten the chain and admit the master of greenacres. "was it you,
sir, doing all that ringing?"

kirklan gilmore, still wearing his disheveled dinner coat, entered the
house with a slow, dragging step. his face, as it had been all day, was
haggard and drawn.

"yes, i rang," he answered; "sorry to rout you out of bed, but i must
have forgotten my keys when i dressed for dinner. it was the only way i
could get in, and i didn't want to spend the night in the studio."

"oh, certainly not, sir," bates agreed hastily. "you mustn't think i am
objecting to getting up to let you in. it's quite all right, sir--quite
all right. but you gave me a surprise; i thought you were in bed hours
ago. have you been at your writing so late?" as an author, kirklan
gilmore was one of those methodical fellows who worked just so many
hours a day, usually eight, and at the most ten.

he laughed mirthlessly. "writing? man, i can't think, much less write."

"you are ill, sir," bates murmured solicitously. "i noticed at dinner
that you did not look well. i thought----" he broke off abruptly,
realizing that thinking, especially as regards family affairs, was not
one of his offices as butler.

"you thought--what?"

"er--nothing, sir; i beg your pardon very humbly. is there anything i
can do for you before you turn in?"

kirklan gilmore's lips twitched.

"thanks for offering, bates; as a matter of fact, i was thinking of
asking you to make me one of those old-fashioned toddies that you once
were so good at in my father's day. with a dash of stomach bitters in
it, you know. my nerves are all shot to pieces, bates. you can see
that; probably liquor won't do any good, but perhaps a good, long drink
will help me get to sleep."

bates' head wagged approvingly on its slender neck.

"your father, mr. kirklan, always found them beneficial after a hard
day at court. i remember one time when----but i mustn't be gabbing,
when your nerves are jumping like that. i'll mix the toddy for you
right off, sir."

"and i'll go with you," said gilmore. "you know, as many of 'em as i've
had, i don't think i ever saw you make one."

"there's a bit of a trick to it," bates admitted modestly and shuffled
toward the rear of the house, gilmore at his slippered heels. a moment
later the butler was performing a service for the author that, in the
old days, he had performed many times for kirklan's father. kirklan
wasn't so fond of liquor as his father had been.

"a full measure of orange juice--like this," bates was saying. "two
squares of sugar and----" he droned on, illustrating his formula, as
gilmore watched him dully.

"take one for yourself, bates," he invited; but the butler shook his
head.

"they say it's a poor doctor that won't take his own prescription, sir;
but it would upset me at this time of night. thank you just the same,
sir. ah, there you are." he handed gilmore the glass, the square of ice
clinking, and the latter accepted it, sipping slowly. he did not gulp
it down hastily, as bates had expected.

"is sarbella still here?"

the butler looked bewildered.

"is he still here, sir? why--why certainly, mr. kirklan. i took it for
granted that he was down for a considerable stay. he retired to his
room a little more than an hour after dinner."

gilmore nodded.

"oh, yes, of course," he murmured and took another sip of the
toddy. "but i thought he might have gone. a little something
happened--something that----my god, man, what's that?"

his body had tensed, and the glass slipped from his fingers, as a look
of horror spread over his face. loud, shrill, blood-chilling, there
rang through the house a terrified scream--a woman's scream.

bang! a sharp, staccato explosion reverberated through the night's
stillness. bates' thin legs were trembling beneath him, his mouth
sagged open, and his eyes rolled wildly toward the ceiling as,
struggling for utterance, he pointed a shaking hand upward.

"that was upstairs!" he cried hoarsely. "something--something terrible
has happened upstairs. it was a shot. and that scream--i swear that it
was miss joan's."

kirklan gilmore stood, his muscles rigid, hands clenched at his sides,
gulping hard.

"joan's scream?" he muttered. "no, bates, no! something tells me, man,
that it was my wife. i tell you it was my wife. quick, the stairs! i've
got to know what happened; i've got to know. come!"

and, although it was gilmore who urged haste, it was the butler who
took the lead, heading for the stairs with a lame lope.

"i--i can't understand it, sir," the servant chattered as he went
along. "there's no weapon in the house except your shotgun; and that
report--it wasn't loud enough for a shotgun. it must have been a
pistol; i am sure that it must have been a pistol."

when they were perhaps halfway up the staircase there came to their
ears, unmistakably clear and permitting no possibility of a mistake,
even in the tenseness of the moment, the sound of a hastily slammed
door. gilmore stopped dead in his tracks. an opening door, some member
of the household aroused by the scream and the explosion, would have
been perfectly understandable. but a closing door! there was the
suggestion of hasty, headlong flight. under the circumstances it was a
sinister sound.

nearing the top of the stairs, the two men, master and servant, saw a
patch of light rays which came from an open doorway down the hall.

"that light!" panted gilmore. "it comes from my wife's room. the door
of her room is open--her light is burning!"

they had now reached that ominously opened door; it stood ajar for
perhaps ten inches. gilmore stopped again, the breath wheezing through
his teeth, as if he might have had a presentiment of what he might find
on the other side of that panel. the old butler went on forward, laid
his withered hand upon the knob; but he was unprepared for the sight
which met his eyes. with a gasp of horror he reeled back.

"you--you were right, sir," he whispered hoarsely. "it is your wife,
and she----be brave, sir--be brave!"

helen gilmore lay in a half-reclining posture on a wicker couch.
looking only at her face, one might have thought her sleeping, such was
the repose of her features. but the bosom of her silk robe was stained
crimson. on the floor, beneath the outflung fingers of one hand, there
was an automatic pistol.

gilmore took another brief step forward and over the butler's shoulder
saw his wife, the light from one of the wall brackets flooding across
her beautiful face--still beautiful even now. a shudder shook his
shoulders, as if the hand of some invisible giant had seized him in a
vicious grip.

"your wife has killed herself!" cried bates. "the poor woman has shot
herself!"

"is she dead?" gilmore cried hoarsely. "i can't--i haven't the
strength--the courage to go near her, bates. can you tell me if--if my
wife is dead?"

the butler was trembling in his agitation, but he steeled himself to
the ordeal and forced his unwilling feet forward. even as he neared
the couch, he thought one last, weak breath escaped the lips of his
master's wife. but he might have been mistaken. his fingers reached
out and touched her cheek.

"she is still warm," he gulped; "of course she would be--so soon after.
but i think she must be dead. you see, sir, the bleeding has stopped.
i understand that is a sign of death." he shook his head slowly. "yes,
mr. kirklan, i am sure that she is dead."

gilmore collapsed into a chair; head lowered, his eyes closed, as if to
blot out the terrible sight in front of him, he began to sob, brokenly,
but without tears. a moment later he checked his grief.

"you'd better call doctor bushnell, bates," he choked. "there--there
might still be a chance of saving her."

the butler shook his head sadly. "i'm afraid not, but there is a way
that i've heard the doctors use----" he shambled to helen's dressing
table where he picked up a silver-backed hand-mirror; then he returned
to the limp form on the couch and held the glass close to her lips.

"yes, i know," gilmore muttered thickly, watching him with a fascinated
stare. "if any breath of life remains, there will be moisture on the
mirror." he leaned forward tensely. "what--what does it show, bates?"

the butler inspected it briefly.

"there is no breathing," he answered; "i was right, sir; your wife is
quite dead. but i will phone for the doctor; that is, i believe, the
customary thing in cases like this."

as the servant moved toward the door, he paused suddenly, a startled
look coming into his eyes.

"it is very strange," he muttered; "yes, very strange."

gilmore looked at him dully. "what is strange?" he demanded heavily.

"that--that she should have shot herself with the door standing open,
sir. if you will pardon me, i know that i wouldn't kill myself--with
a door open. i would lock myself in. and"--his voice sank to a tense,
vibrating whisper--"mr. kirklan, did you hear a door slamming shut, as
we were coming up the stairs just a moment ago?"

"i heard a noise, bates, yes. you are sure, bates, that it was a
closing door?"

"quite sure of it!" cried bates. "there is something else, too. if she
shot herself, why did she scream? my word, sir, don't you understand?
your wife has been murdered!"




                               chapter x

                             common sense


"your wife has been murdered sir," repeated the butler, with growing
conviction of his sudden theory. "i am not a detective, but i am sure,
were it suicide, the door here would have been closed--locked. that is
only common sense, mr. kirklan."

kirklan gilmore forced his eyes to that lifeless, crimson-stained form
which so recently had been alive, that lovely creature whom he had
married only three weeks before. his face was set in a rigid paralysis
of horror, which did not change even when he turned his head away and
closed his eyes.

"no, bates, no!" he cried thickly. "it--it couldn't be. look! there
is the gun beside her, where it must have dropped from her fingers
after--after she pressed the trigger. your first impression was the
right one; helen has killed herself."

but the butler was not to be shaken.

"you heard the scream, sir," he argued; "the scream that sounded before
we heard the shot--the scream that i thought was miss joan's."

"what nonsense!" muttered gilmore, pressing his hands to his temple. "a
scream is a scream, bates; they all sound alike."

"of course i was mistaken," the butler broke in hastily. "i had heard
miss joan scream once, the time you were thrown by the horse, and we
all thought you had been killed. it sounded so much like that, sir, i
thought for a moment----but naturally it could not have been miss joan."

"certainly not," said gilmore. "why do you stand there arguing about
it? go call the doctor, can't you? tell doctor bushnell to come
quickly."

yet bates delayed another moment to press his theory.

"do you remember the scream, sir?" he whispered. "there was terror in
it. not at all the kind of a scream, mr. kirklan, that one would give
unless faced with a terrible danger. and people do not scream when they
are about to shoot themselves."

gilmore groaned and tossed his hands wildly.

"stop it!" he cried hoarsely. "get out! do what i tell you--call the
doctor. you're a butler, not a policeman. in heaven's name, bates, get
a move on you."

as the butler shambled into the hall, almost ludicrous in his haste, he
narrowly escaped a collision with victor sarbella, who appeared from
out of the darkness, a dressing gown thrown over his pajamas.

"what's happened?" demanded the guest of greenacres. "i thought
i heard a shot." his voice was strained, excited; there could be
considered nothing strange in that, for there was certainly the
promise of sinister, tragic things when the after-midnight stillness
of a peaceable country house is shattered by the startling voice of
exploding gunpowder.

"the younger mrs. gilmore is dead, shot--murdered!" panted bates, and
dashed on past so headlong that it seemed he would surely tumble down
the steps.

a smothered exclamation broke through sarbella's lips, and for a brief
moment he did not move, as he stared toward the half-open door in front
of him. his face was set into tense lines. from within he heard the
sound of a groan, and, stepping forward, he saw kirklan gilmore, as his
body sagged in a chair, twisting his hands with such intensity that it
seemed he must snap the finger joints. and then the artist saw the dead
woman on the chaise longue.

"great lord, kirklan----"

the novelist turned, flinging out an accusing finger in a wild gesture.
"you did this!" he screamed. "you----"

sarbella's eyes narrowed, his face hardened. "be careful what you say,
gilmore," he broke in. "it is no light thing to accuse a man of murder."

"i say you did it! helen has killed herself, and you--you drove her to
it--you drove her to her death."

sarbella was naturally bewildered.

"your butler says your wife has been murdered; then you accuse me of
it, and now you switch everything around by telling me that she has
killed herself. i don't know what it all means. what _has_ happened?"

"bates is an old fool," muttered gilmore. "of course she has killed
herself. you see--there is the gun on the floor, where it dropped from
her fingers. any one can see that it was suicide."

one might have thought that a look of relief came into the face of the
artist; he nodded his head slowly in agreement.

"yes, that's the way it appears; but if that is the case, why is it
that your butler says----"

"oh, what's the use of discussing my butler's notions. he seems to
think that he ought to be a detective, that's all. she killed herself,
and"--his voice became edged with bitterness--"it was you who drove her
to do it."

the artist tossed out his hands in an imploring gesture. "that is
unfair," he protested. "perhaps her conscience, but am i responsible
for her conscience? am i responsible for--for her sins?"

kirklan gilmore staggered to his feet. "what do you mean--her sins?" he
cried hoarsely. "am i never to know the truth about her?"

sarbella shook his head. "not from my lips," he answered; "she is dead.
let what past there be buried with her. it will be better that way,
kirklan--better for every one."

"who is dead?" came a tremulous question from the hall. the novelist
recognized the voice of mrs. gilmore, his stepmother, and leaped
forward to prevent her entrance. he knew, high-strung, nervous woman
that she was, the gruesome sight would be a tremendous, perhaps even
dangerous, shock to her.

"you--you mustn't come in here, mother. something--something has
happened to helen."

"you mean," gasped mrs. gilmore, clutching at the casing of the door
for support, "that she is dead?"

"yes, helen is dead," finished kirklan. "go back to your room, please."

"i was awakened by something. i am not certain just what it was,"
whispered the little, gray-haired woman. "and then there was a shot.
you mean, kirklan, that your wife----"

the novelist inclined his head. "helen has--has killed herself. bates
has gone to telephone doctor bushnell; there is nothing you can
do--nothing. now please return to your room."

mrs. gilmore began to sob wildly, perhaps not so much from grief as
from the hysteria of horror.

"she has killed herself--suicide! oh, the disgrace, the scandal of it;
three weeks married and--a suicide. i--i knew that something awful
would happen. it was in the air. i had a presentiment of it at dinner.
all of you acted so strangely, so tragic. kirklan, what made her do it?"

"i don't know," he answered thickly. "perhaps the reason for it died
with her. i--i don't want to talk any more about it, mother; it's all i
can do to hold myself together. won't you please go back to your room?"

mrs. gilmore, making a move to obey him, released her fingers from the
support of the door casing and staggered; thus, unintentionally, she
reeled just within the door. as she saw the crimson-stained form on the
lounge, a scream tore up through her throat. she swayed dizzily, her
knees crumpled beneath her, and she would have fallen to the floor in a
limp heap, had not kirklan reached out and caught her in his arms.

"sarbella!" he called. "she--has fainted. i knew that would happen
if--if she saw it. won't you help me with her? i--i suppose we'd better
take her to joan's room; she can't be left alone in this condition."

victor sarbella rushed forward to lend his assistance, and between
them they supported the limp, gray-haired figure down the hall to the
wing of the house where joan sheridan's belongings had been banished by
the coming of kirklan's bride to greenacres. this, the room of tragedy,
had been joan's until the coming of the house's new mistress.

"you'll find a light button there, near the corner of the turn,"
directed gilmore, and sarbella fumbled for the switch. "it's the last
door to the right. she--she's heavier than i thought."

as the two men came to the door that kirklan had indicated, there
reached both of their ears the muffled sound of sobbing--convulsive,
hysterical sobs. a tremor went through gilmore.

joan's room being somewhat removed from the other part of the house, it
was reasonable that the sound of the shot might not have awakened her,
but, being awake, how could she have failed to hear it? and she was not
asleep! she was awake--weeping!

apprehensive terror clutched at gilmore's heart--the terror of a
sinister something that he could not explain. was it possible that,
after all, it had been joan who had screamed? sarbella, too, looked
startled and darted his host a quick, uneasy, questioning glance. his
arms being occupied, gilmore kicked his shoe against the foot of the
door, as a substitute for rapping. on the other side of the panel the
choking sobs suddenly ceased.

"yes?"

"it's kirklan, joan. something has happened, and your mother has
fainted. we thought we ought to bring her here to you."

"just--just a moment, kirk," came the tremulous answer, "and i will let
you in."

there was a brief wait and the sound of running water, as the girl
within the room turned on a faucet. then the door opened, and joan
stood before them. although it was now almost one o'clock in the
morning, she had not taken down her hair for the night; she had, late
as it was, not yet retired. evidently the sound of running water had
marked her effort to undo the evidence of tears, but her eyes were red
and her face was ghastly! after a first furtive glance her gaze avoided
gilmore's eyes.

"you can put her on my bed," she said in a shaking voice, but she did
not ask why her mother had fainted.

"something very terrible has happened, joan," the novelist said
hoarsely. "didn't you hear it?" he had placed his stepmother on the bed
and mechanically began to rub her wrists.

"didn't i hear--what?" joan asked so faintly that her voice was hardly
audible.

"the pistol shot--just--just a few minutes ago," answered gilmore.

the girl shuddered, her head averted. her hands were clenched at her
sides, and her lower lip was imprisoned between her teeth, obviously in
an effort to keep it from trembling. she was making a tremendous effort
to keep her self-control.

"i did not hear a pistol shot," she said, her voice still very low. "i
did not hear any shot. why do you ask?"

"helen has killed herself, joan; she shot herself with a pistol."

there was no startled cry of horror from joan's lips, as she heard what
might have been supposed to be her first news of tragedy. but was it
news to her? there was not so much as an exclamation of surprise, not
so much as a murmured word of sorrow or sympathy.

standing a little to one side, victor sarbella stared at the girl in
narrow-eyed, intent interest, evidently greatly puzzled by her peculiar
attitude. joan still said nothing; almost absently she began massaging
her mother's ice-cold fingers.

"she faints very easily," she murmured. "it is never serious. she will
be all right presently. mr. sarbella, will you please dampen a towel
under the cold-water tap?"

"i had been out at the studio," gilmore went on, the words tumbling
out jerkily. "i think i must have fallen asleep out there. when i came
to the house i found that i didn't have my keys, and had to ring for
bates to let me in. my nerves were in a bad way, so i asked bates to
mix me a toddy, a nightcap. i was drinking it, when both of us--bates
and i--heard a scream. right after that there was a shot. bates and i
rushed upstairs to find helen dead; that's all i know."

as his voice trailed off to a dull, lifeless stop, joan gave a start
and looked up to take the damp towel that sarbella offered her. she
placed it across her mother's forehead; mrs. gilmore stirred under this
application and moaned faintly.

"i think mother will be all right now," said joan. "i don't think it
will be necessary for either of you to stay. if i need you i will
call."

"bates has telephoned to doctor bushnell. i will have him see mother
when he comes, joan."

joan nodded.

"perhaps it would be best," she agreed. "she is very high-strung, and
may need an opiate. it was a tremendous shock to her--of course."

kirklan began a retreat from the room, and sarbella, after another
queer glance at joan, followed. no word was spoken until they had come
to the room of the tragedy.

"i can't stand to go back in there!" gilmore cried hoarsely. "it--it's
all that i can do to hold myself together as it is. i think i'll go
downstairs and have another drink."

victor sarbella, frowning so deeply that his eyes seemed to be closed,
put out his hand impulsively.

"don't do that, my friend," he murmured; "for your own sake--don't.
liquor will not help any at a time like this, and it will look bad,
very bad, for you to be under the weather at a time like this."

the butler came hurrying up the stairs.

"i have had doctor bushnell on the wire, sir," he reported. "he had
just got home from a call, and he says that he will be here as quickly
as the car can bring him--a matter of minutes. it is only two miles
from the village."

kirklan gilmore glanced shudderingly toward the door of his wife's
room. "it doesn't seem right," he muttered, "leaving her in there
alone, but i can't stand to look at her again. i----"

"there no use torturing yourself," advised sarbella. "it is quite
certain that she is beyond all human help. there is nothing that can
be done until the doctor comes. here, man, you're wabbly--all in; sit
down here on the top step. hold yourself together the best you can, my
friend."

kirklan laughed harshly, mirthlessly. "stop calling me 'my friend,'
sarbella," he said unsteadily. "i won't have any more of that from you.
if it hadn't been for your coming down here, helen would----" he broke
off abruptly, as he realized that bates was within earshot, and that
very little missed the butler.

sarbella shrugged his shoulders, but made no verbal response. the house
had become intensely still again. from the foot of the stairs there
was the steady, measured ticking of the tall clock on the first floor,
as the long pendulum moved to and fro. gilmore sat down on the steps,
shoulders slumping forward, as he laced and unlaced his fingers.

why had joan been sobbing in her room? what was the reason for her
strange behavior? why had her face been so ghastly pale, even before he
had informed her of helen's death?

he pondered this.

"listen!" said bates, breaking the uneasy silence. the other two men
jerked into an attentive attitude. there came to their ears the hum
of a powerful motor. an instant later an automobile horn blasted the
stillness in brief announcement. doctor bushnell had arrived.




                              chapter xi

                       bushnell calls the police


the butler hurried stumblingly down the steps to admit doctor bushnell,
who had been the gilmore family physician for almost a dozen years;
he swung open the door, as the doctor was stepping briskly across the
porch.

"you got here in a hurry, doctor," said bates. "it happened upstairs.
mr. kirklan is up there now--at the top of the steps. she's dead; i
held a mirror to her face and----"

"yes, so you told me over the telephone," broke in doctor bushnell; he
was a tall, crisp man, with a pair of gray eyes looking out from behind
a pair of rimless spectacles.

"she----" began bates again.

"this is no time for conversation, my good man," the doctor again
interrupted firmly, but not impatiently. "you can talk later." he
started swiftly for the stairs.

but bates was not to be shaken off so easily.

"you didn't give me a chance to finish telling you over the phone," he
said, blocking the way. "mr. kirklan says she killed herself, but i
know better. she was murdered."

doctor bushnell abruptly halted. "murdered?" he repeated.

"see if you don't bear me out, sir," whispered the butler. "i'm not a
detective, but i've got common sense enough to know----"

the physician shook loose bates' fingers. "there'll be time enough for
that, bates. just now there's a chance--a bare chance--that you are
mistaken, and that she is still alive. if there is any chance of saving
her, there must be no wasted time."

surgical kit swinging at his side, the doctor bounded up the stairs,
two steps at a time. kirklan gilmore was waiting just outside the
door of helen's room. the doctor offered his hand, and they clasped
silently for a brief moment, the grasp of the physician warm-hearted,
sympathetic.

"am i too late, kirklan?"

the novelist bowed his head. "yes, doctor bushnell, you are too late.
she is dead--i am sure she is dead. she shot herself with a pistol.
she is--there." he pointed to the partly open door. "it--it won't be
necessary for me to--to come in there with you?"

the doctor gave a pitying glance at the young husband, whose wife had
been taken from him after three weeks of marriage; he saw the haggard,
drawn face, the horror-filled eyes, the twitching lips.

"it will not be necessary," he answered quietly. "perhaps you had
better wait downstairs. if i need you i will call."

"th-thanks," gulped gilmore.

doctor bushnell, after a glance at victor sarbella, who, of course, was
a stranger, passed on into the room and closed the door behind him.
being a doctor, he was steeled to death, but he was hardly prepared for
the sight that shocked his eyes. despite himself, his nerves reacted
with a tingle of horror, and a gasp slipped through his lips.

quickly he bent over the still form of the beautiful woman; it was
the first time that he had seen kirklan's wife, although gossip of
the surprisingly sudden unannounced marriage had reached the near-by
village. little more than a cursory examination was necessary to
verify the butler's earlier findings. helen gilmore was dead; she had
succumbed to that bullet wound which the doctor found in the chest,
just a little below the left armpit.

"she was murdered!" the butler's statement came back to doctor bushnell
with a rush of conviction now. it would have been almost impossible
for such a wound to have been self-inflicted. for the woman to have
shot herself would have meant the holding of the weapon at a decidedly
awkward and unnatural angle. possible, perhaps, but highly improbable
from a medical viewpoint.

doctor bushnell's face had become grim. swiftly he unfastened the
surgical kit and found a long, slender probe, with which he might
approximate the direction that the bullet had taken. ranging downward!
still further argument against the wound having been self-inflicted.

"bates was right!" muttered the physician. "i wonder how he knew." he
stepped back and glanced at the gun on the floor. he had, of course,
noted that the moment he had entered the room, and he took it at the
moment as proof of suicide. the pistol had every appearance of falling
from the hand flung out over the edge of the lounge.

"who could have killed her--this beautiful bride of three weeks?" he
said under his breath. as a physician, as a surgeon, he knew the right
thing to do at the right time, but now a feeling of helplessness came
over him. obviously something had to be done. what?

as he stood there in the center of the floor, staring down at the dead
woman, debating, there came to his ears the sound of a muffled cough in
the hall. he took a quick step toward the closed door, more than half
suspecting that some one was eavesdropping.

"oh, it's you, bates," he grunted, as he saw the butler. "you might as
well come in; there are some questions i wanted to ask you, anyhow."

"yes, sir," murmured bates, entering the tragedy chamber willingly
enough. "have you discovered anything, doctor?"

"did you examine the body, bates?"

the butler shivered.

"examine it?" he whispered. "heaven, no! i held a mirror close to her
face; i touched her with my hand; that is all. why did you ask me that,
sir?"

"i wondered what made you so certain that it was murder, bates, and
whether you had observed the nature of the wound which caused her
death."

"it wasn't that made me know it was murder; it wasn't anything more
than just common sense. the door into the hall was open when we found
her."

"the door was open? what significance was there in that?"

"would you shoot yourself, sir, with a door standing half open?"

doctor bushnell stared and, after considering this question for a
moment, shook his head. "no," he answered slowly; "since you mention
it, i don't suppose i would."

"and you wouldn't scream, doctor, while you were getting ready to pull
the trigger," added the deductively inclined butler.

"you mean----"

"i mean, sir, that she screamed horribly. oh, it was a terrible scream,
the kind of a scream that makes a man's blood turn to ice." bates made
no mention of his first impression that the scream might have been
that of miss joan; he had, in his own mind, entirely rejected that
possibility as too absurd for any consideration whatever. "as i take
it, sir, she screamed when she knew that she was about to be murdered."

"humph!" murmured doctor bushnell. "you've got quicker wits than i'd
given you credit for. you figured that out like--well, like, i imagine,
a trained detective might do it."

despite the situation, bates gave a faint smile of pleasure at this
compliment.

"i have always read a great many detective stories, sir," he said.
"i've not only read them, i've studied them. i might say that i am
quite a student in a way. had i not waited so late in life to develop
my mental faculties, i hardly think that i should have remained a
butler. in fact, i am quite sure that i would not."

"you're a queer fellow," mused the doctor. "what else have you
deducted, bates? can you manage your tongue?"

"why do you ask that, doctor? if you mean, can i keep from talking too
much, i can be very discreet."

"all right, bates; then i'll tell you that you were right. this woman
has been murdered. the nature of the wound verifies your guess."

bates looked grieved. "you don't call it guessing?" his tone was
protesting.

"well, no, not guessing," doctor bushnell answered slowly. "it had
more foundation than a guess. very logical, bates, reasoning out that
business about the door. what else can you tell about this business?"

"very little, sir, very little, indeed. mr. kirklan and i rushed
directly upstairs when the shot was fired and then----"

"wait a minute. you rushed upstairs? what time was this?"

"a few minutes after half past twelve, very shortly before i had you on
the telephone."

doctor bushnell gave the man a quick glance. "you had been in bed,
hadn't you? i judge from your state of dress----"

"quite so, doctor; i had retired early. i was sound asleep when i was
awakened by the ringing of the doorbell. it was mr. gilmore; he had
locked himself out and was trying to get in. he had been out at the
studio--the old stable, you know, where he does his writing. the poor
man was quite badly upset; he was in a terrible way, and asked me to
make him a toddy."

the physician looked uneasy. "good lord, bates," he muttered, "you
don't think it possible that kirklan----"

"oh, certainly not, sir," the butler broke in quickly. "it was quite
impossible. i was standing within four feet of him when we both heard
the scream and the shot. the glass dropped out of his hand, and he
stood there like a man of stone, his hands shaking, his face white as
a sheet of paper. he said: 'my god, bates, what's that?' and while we
were both still listening, there came the shot; it must have followed
the scream by half a minute, perhaps not so long as that. we both
dashed up the stairs, i in front. while we were mounting the steps,
sir, we both heard a sound that seemed to be the slamming of a door."

"ah!" exclaimed the doctor. "the slamming of a door? then you think
that some one in the house----"

"that would be but guessing, doctor. the door of this room was open,
the light was burning, and i was the first to see her. it seemed
to me--i cannot be sure--that she took her last breath while i was
watching her. the bleeding had stopped. am i right, doctor, in
supposing that the flow of blood stops when death takes place?"

doctor bushnell nodded. "yes, when the heart action ceases," he
answered. "what else, bates?"

"the gun was just as you see it now, sir. it was only natural that mr.
gilmore should be so firm in his belief that she had taken her own
life. he was not even convinced when i mentioned the matter of the door
and the scream. poor man, he couldn't be expected to do any thinking at
a time like that. he was very much in love with her; he seemed fairly
to worship her. it was too bad that she wasn't the right wife for him.
miss joan is the one he should have married; she's only his stepsister,
you know, no blood kin. i guess it nearly broke her heart, poor girl,
when----"

"what do you mean by saying she wasn't the right wife for him, bates?"
broke in the doctor, moving toward the bed, where he began removing
a sheet with which to cover the body until an undertaker could be
summoned.

"she had good looks, but she wasn't his kind," bates replied. "she'd
managed to climb up in the world--most likely from pretty near the
bottom. a servant can usually tell, sir, from watching them at table,
and a letter came--day before yesterday, i believe it was--a most
disreputable-looking letter it was, sir, to be received at greenacres,
all smudgy and dirty. it gave her a shock, too, although she tried to
pass it off casual."

"what the servants don't know!" murmured the doctor under his breath,
and then added, aloud: "you think there may have been some connection
between the letter and the murder?"

"as to that, i couldn't say, doctor bushnell, but she was much
agitated, it seemed to me. i would say that it must have been written
by some very low person, a most peculiar sort of a missive for mr.
kirklan's wife to be getting."

"all these little scraps of information may prove valuable, bates," the
doctor said meditatively. "you were pretty sharp on naming it murder.
perhaps you have some theory as to who killed her."

bates looked crestfallen; his slender stock of theory was completely
exhausted, and then he brightened.

"finger prints!" he exclaimed. "perhaps the murderer's finger prints
are on the gun." he made a move to pick up the weapon, but the doctor
stopped him with a gesture.

"better not," he warned. "i understand it's such a simple matter to
destroy a delicate thing like a finger print. we'd better leave that
for more practiced talents than ours; i'm afraid that all finger prints
look alike to both of us."

"it wasn't robbery, sir," offered the butler. "she is still wearing
some jewelry."

"yes, i'd noticed that. there are no back stairs, bates?"

"there are none."

"in that case, bates, it hardly seems likely that the slayer could have
fled from the second floor without you or kirklan seeing him. that
probably means that the murderer is still in the house. that would not
give us a very large list, eh?"

the butler's eyes widened.

"you mean, sir," he whispered tensely, "that you think mr. sarbella
could----"

"i mentioned no names, bates. sarbella--is that the man i saw in the
hall when i arrived?"

"yes, sir, that's him; he's a friend of mr. kirklan's, a guest who
came out only this afternoon--yesterday afternoon it is now, speaking
precise. he's some kind of an artist, i believe. i guess he's an
italian, sir. i don't want to go around accusing any one, doctor
bushnell, but----"

"but what, bates? this talk is strictly between ourselves."

"there was a most peculiar attitude at dinner, sir; mr. sarbella and
her"--pointing toward the sheet-covered lounge--"did not so much as
speak once, while i was serving. they were all on edge--even mr.
kirklan. i didn't understand it; i don't understand it now. after
dinner the younger mrs. gilmore went very quickly to her room; she was
pale and nervous. i don't think i know anything more, doctor."

"just one more question, bates. you and mr. kirklan were downstairs.
sarbella was upstairs. who else?"

"the elder mrs. gilmore, miss joan, and her." again he pointed to the
dead woman.

"what about the other servants?"

"elizabeth, the maid, went to yonkers yesterday, sir. she pleaded that
her mother was ill, but i doubt it. she don't know what the truth
is, that girl; she's always making excuses, and mrs. gilmore is that
soft-hearted she never refuses her."

"or doubts her stories," added doctor bushnell with a faint smile. "a
most credulous woman, mrs. gilmore."

"exactly, sir," agreed the butler. "mrs. bogart, the cook, does not
sleep at greenacres; she comes every morning from the village and goes
home again at night. and the gardener isn't employed full time--only
three days a week."

"to me it looks very much like mr. sarbella," murmured the doctor and
glanced around the room. for all that the physician knew there might be
clews within touching distance, but which he, untrained as he was in
such business, would never be able to recognize as clews.

"i am going to lock this door, bates," he said. "no one must enter it
without my express permission. i am going downstairs now. i suppose you
might as well go to bed."

"what's the use?" muttered bates. "not a wink of sleep would i get
after this."

the key was in the lock; doctor bushnell removed it and put it in the
outside of the door. then he turned off the lights, stepped into the
hall, shot the bolt, put the key in his pocket, and went down the
stairs. he found kirklan gilmore and victor sarbella in the library,
the latter sitting in a chair, puffing nervously at a cigarette, while
the novelist paced back and forth like a caged beast. at the doctor's
step, gilmore swung around.

"you found her dead, of course?" he muttered thickly.

"yes, kirklan, i found her beyond all help." doctor bushnell gave a
quick glance at sarbella, who returned it steadily for a moment with
his intense black eyes. "i would like to talk with you, kirklan,
privately if i may. suppose we go across the hall into the den."

sarbella inhaled deeply at his cigarette and got to his feet.

"i am going to my room," he announced; "if you need me for anything,
i shall be at your service." he moved perhaps three paces toward the
stairs and then turned; his face was in the shadows, so that it was
impossible to see any expression that may have been on his features, as
he asked: "you discovered that it was self-destruction?"

"so it would appear," answered the doctor, deliberately indulging in
a deceiving play on words. with suspicion pointing toward sarbella,
it was perhaps best that the man not know too much--just yet. if the
artist were guilty, there might be something gained by keeping him in
ignorance that the suicide sham had fooled no one. sarbella moved on up
the stairs; doctor bushnell would have given a pretty penny to have
had a good look at his face, wondering if he might not see there a look
of relieved suspense.

kirklan gilmore's hands fidgeted restlessly in his pockets. "you say
that you want to talk with me privately?"

"yes, suppose we go into the den."

"that isn't necessary now, is it? sarbella has accommodatingly gone
upstairs to his room."

"the den, if you don't mind," insisted doctor bushnell. "i'd prefer
taking no chances of being overheard."

gilmore's head jerked up. "i can't understand the reason for all this
secrecy," he muttered; nevertheless he led the way across the hall to
the room known as the den. it had in former days been his father's
favorite room. the physician followed and gently closed the door.

"sit down, kirklan," he murmured. "i dislike to add to your strain,
but there is something that i must tell you. your wife did not kill
herself."

the novelist winced.

"you mean----"

"kirklan, it's murder."

gilmore staggered and dropped limply into one of the big leather
chairs, face buried in his hands. "but, doctor bushnell, it--it can't
be that. there--there was the gun beside her. that is proof----"

"only proof of an effort to make murder appear suicide," broke in
the physician. "the nature of the wound is such as to preclude any
reasonable thought of self-infliction."

"murder?" gilmore whispered dully. "bates was right, after all, then?
i can't understand it. who would have killed her?"

"ah, that is what remains in front of us. i am in a very peculiar
position, kirklan. i am your family physician, but at the same time i
am a deputy coroner; i accepted the appointment only last month. it is
my official duty to do everything in my power that the law may take its
proper course. i don't suppose you know whom the gun belongs to?"

"i do not know."

"it is a heavy gun, kirklan; not at all the sort of weapon that would
belong to a woman, or that a woman would use if it were left to her own
choice. i have not examined it; i have not so much as touched it. i was
afraid that i might destroy possible finger prints; i thought it best
to wait."

"wound or no wound," muttered gilmore, "i can't believe that it was
murder. why would any one have killed her?"

"kirklan, i am going to put a frank question. how well do you know this
guest of yours, the man sarbella?"

"great lord, doctor, you don't think that he----"

"i'm afraid i don't think anything yet. i'm just stabbing around in the
dark. was sarbella previously acquainted with your wife?"

"see here, i don't want any insinuations of that sort."

"i am not insinuating, only asking a question. bates thought he noticed
a peculiar, strained situation at the dinner table. since you and bates
rushed directly upstairs, and since that is the only means of reaching
the second floor, it seems quite certain that she was killed by some
one who is still in the house. there is no evidence of robbery. there
were but five persons in the house--sarbella, your stepmother, joan
sheridan, bates, and yourself. unless we want to suspect mrs. gilmore
or joan----"

"oh, that's too absurd for words," broke in gilmore, making no mention
of having heard joan's sobbing.

"and that leaves sarbella."

the novelist beat his clenched hands against his knees. "doctor, i tell
you that you're wrong--wrong!" he cried. "helen killed herself; there
is no other explanation--none! i must tell you something; my wife asked
me for a thousand dollars. she must have needed it desperately. because
i did not give it to her----what are you doing with that telephone?"

doctor bushnell had picked up the instrument from the desk and lifted
the receiver from the hook.

"i am doing what i must do, kirklan," he answered with quiet firmness.
"i am calling the village police."




                              chapter xii

                            "wiggly" price


the local police authority in the village of ardmore was vested in the
person of mr. hamilton griggs, who held the office of constable, and
whose most important duty was the enforcement of the municipality's
automobile laws. since the roads were exceptionally good, and since
constable griggs received a fee of two dollars and fifty cents for
each arrest resulting in a collected fine, he found the office fairly
lucrative during the touring months.

constable griggs--generally called "ham" by way of brevity--was a
widower and occupied with his daughter a neat, green-shuttered cottage
on hudson street. his police equipment was a high-powered motor cycle,
and his most profitable hours of patrol duty were between nightfall
and a little past twelve, when automobilists were hurrying over the
highways, probably feeling more secure in their breach of law under
cover of darkness.

it had been a good night for speeders, and "ham" griggs was mightily
pleased with himself; an even ten arrests he had made, the fines had
all been paid, and the neat sum of twenty-five dollars in fees reposed
in a trousers pocket of his khaki uniform. at a quarter of one his
motor cycle putt-putted stormily into the yard beside the cottage. he
shut off the engine, locked the ignition, and, going to the rear of the
house, let himself in through the unlocked kitchen door.

etta, his daughter, had set out a cold lunch for him, as was her
custom, and the constable lost no time in "falling to." with a chuckle
of satisfaction he took the little wad of crumpled bills from his
pocket and tossed them to the top of the kitchen table, where he might
enjoy the sight of them.

"pretty good," he told himself with a grin. "let 'em speed!"

there was even further reason for jubilation. during his patrol of the
roads within the village's corporate limits, he had found the deserted
blue taxi, where don haskins, fleeing the new york police, had left it
to continue his journey to greenacres on foot.

taking the number, he had reported his find to the new york company
which controlled an entire fleet of like cabs. there ought to be a
ten-spot from the taxi company, the constable told himself. all in all,
it had been a most satisfactory night.

ham griggs was a heavy-set, dull-faced man of forty-odd; he had,
prior to his elevation into public office, been a caretaker for one
of the summer homes which border the hudson river. having an appetite
in proportion to his stalwart build, he ate with a gusty heartiness.
when the last chicken bone had been picked clean, he leaned back in
the chair, which creaked protestingly on its two rear, straining legs,
loosened his belt, and took from inside his uniform cap, always the
policeman's cigar cache, a rich-looking havana which had been the
ineffectual peace offering of a gentleman who had been doing forty
miles per, when mr. griggs halted him.

"ah!" murmured the constable, puffing deeply. "betcha this is a
twenty-center--mebbe twenty-five." he removed it from his mouth and
examined the embossed band with utmost respect. "a smoke like this sure
tops off a good feed."

his coat unbuttoned, his thumbs hooked beneath the straps of his
wide-webbed suspenders, he continued smoking until the electric light
seemed to be swimming in a sea of smoke. and then the telephone rang,
a loud, insistent jangling from the front of the cottage. ham griggs'
chair thudded down on all fours with such force that there was the
sound of cracking wood.

"now i wonder what that is?" he grunted. ardmore being a quiet,
law-abiding community, a night call for the constable was highly
unusual. he lumbered hastily to his feet and plunged toward the sitting
room, where the telephone was located. the bell was still ringing when
he took down the receiver.

"hello!" he shouted into the transmitter. "hello there! dang it,
central, quit ringin' in my ear; you'll bust an eardrum!" possibly in
retaliation of this impolite tone, the switchboard operator buzzed
again.

"constable?"

"yeah, this is ham griggs."

"doctor bushnell speaking, constable. there's been a tragedy at
greenacres--the gilmore place, you know. can you come at once?"

"whatcha mean--tragedy, doc?"

"there'll be time enough for that when you get here," came the voice of
the village physician.

"i gotta right to know," grunted ham griggs. "let's have it." his
voice was officially important now. "y'mean robbery?"

"worse than that, constable. oh, i might as well tell you--kirklan
gilmore's wife has been killed. it is--murder."

"good lord, murder!" cried griggs, his voice rising thunderously loud.
"who killed her, doc? who done it?"

"that's our job, constable, to find out. you'll come right away?"

"sure i will. whatcha think i'm constable for? how--how was she killed?"

"shot, griggs; let's not waste any more time talking now." and at the
other end of the line the receiver clicked, breaking the connection.

it was not surprising that the persistent ringing of the phone and
ham griggs' loud-pitched voice should have aroused the constable's
daughter, etta. she appeared in the sitting-room doorway, her hair done
up in curlers, her rather plain face a glistening smudge of cold cream.

"what's happened, fawther?" she demanded, her none-too-plump arms
hugged tight across her flat chest.

"ain't i told you to cut out that 'fawther' stuff?" growled ham griggs.

"yes, fawther, but did you say somebody had been murdered?"

"that's the size of it," nodded the constable, beginning to button his
coat. "out to greenacres--gilmore's new wife, so doc bushnell says."

"my gawd!" gasped etta griggs, momentarily forgetting her little book,
"social english." etta was ambitious for herself; she was engaged in
writing a play, and wished to equip herself to move as one of the
elect in literary circles, when the moment of her great success should
arrive. "the--the author's wife? why, they ain't--they haven't been
married a month yet! did he kill her, fawther?"

ham griggs was impatient of questions, eager to be off, but his
daughter barred the sitting room's one door, and he knew that the only
way to pass without absolute violence was to answer her.

"i don't know nothin' 'bout it," he grunted, "except what the doc told
me, which was precious little. seems like she's been shot. i dunno who
done it. now get outta the way, etta, an' let me get goin'."

"chances are he did," mused etta; "we literati are so temperamental, so
given to quick, strong passions."

"you just natcherally make me sick!" snorted her father, as he plunged
past her. a moment later she heard his motor cycle bark into life and,
with staccato explosions from the exhaust, race out of the yard and
down the quiet village street.

etta's rôle in the greenacres tragedy was more important than one might
imagine it could be, and for no greater reason than that she aspired to
be a playwright. her play had reached its fourth and final act; with a
few minor corrections here and there, it was ready for its journey to
new york. she had not the slightest doubt of its immediate acceptance
and production.

she realized in a vague sort of way the power of the newspapers;
and, little knowing into how many independent departments a great
daily is divided, she was suddenly seized with an idea--a great idea.
the murder of mrs. gilmore, she reasoned, was news, stupendous news;
kirklan gilmore was a famous novelist. the newspaper which she read
regularly would, as she saw it, naturally feel grateful to her for
giving them firsthand information regarding the tragedy. it would serve
as a pleasant introduction to the editor of that great metropolitan
publication, would tincture the review of her "play" with a personal
kindliness.

what queer notions people do get into their heads! but the merit of her
idea is neither here nor there; the important thing is that etta griggs
did call the office of _the morning star_, and she was thus responsible
for the appearance on the scene of a certain news hound named jimmy
price, sometimes more intimately known as "wiggly."

the news-gathering staff of _the star_ is a high-pressure, hectic
organization; one would wonder how they could get out an intelligent
paper in the midst of such a mad scramble. it was nearing press time
for the final edition; scoggins, the city editor, was bellowing at
the top of his nasal voice; the copy desk was railroading a last
batch of late news matter; the assistant make-up man, who is one of
the important gentlemen who keep the type in the right columns, was
screaming frantically about something of which no one except himself
seemed to know anything, and, from the way the office boys were
sliding back and forth across the floor, one might have thought the
city room was the skating rink of an insane asylum.

and then, with a breathless suddenness--silence! in newspaper parlance,
"the paper had been put to bed." from the street below there sounded
the blump-blump of a flat-wheeled surface car journeying along park
row. scoggins, the city editor, gave a look at his news schedule,
sighed, and jerked off the shade which protected his eyes.

"there's not a live piece of local news in the whole darn paper!" he
muttered. "here, milne, take the desk; i'm going home, and----" he took
a last survey around the long, paper-cluttered city room, and saw jimmy
price, who was cognizant that he had incurred the displeasure of the
gods, trying to do a quick sneak out.

"hey, you, price!" he bawled.

jimmy price turned, and it became apparent why he had been saddled with
the nickname of wiggly. in moments of inner excitement or of strong
emotion, jimmy's protuberant ears became animate objects. they were
unruly ears, always wiggling when he least wanted them to; it seemed
that jimmy had absolutely no control over his ears. they were wiggling
now, for their owner sensed what was coming. he turned slowly and
retraced his steps toward the city editor's desk, which was set up on
a platform. the boys called it "the throne," and certainly no monarch
ever held more despotic sway than caleb scoggins, the city editor of
_the star_.

scoggins was a good city editor, but he was a man of strong
prejudices, and he was prejudiced against wiggly's animated ears.
it annoyed him to look down the room and have a perfectly good idea
take sudden flight, as he was forced to stare in fascinated, almost
hypnotized, interest at a pair of ears doing a sort of uncanny dance
on the side of a man's head, while the owner of those remarkable
appendages bent industriously over his typewriter entirely unaware of
his innocent havoc. bob roddy, the star rewrite man, that high-salaried
word slinger, whose supple brain and nimble fingers could paint a
column word picture with no more material than a five-line news
bulletin, was, likely as not, to be discovered staring, vacant-eyed, at
"wiggly" price, while the desk was waiting for the rest of his story.

and jimmy price was a good reporter, a rattling good one, so good, in
fact, that scoggins had been at a loss for an excuse to fire him. but
now he had the excuse.

"price," he rasped, "you fell down on the hammerslaw kidnaping case."
his voice had the tone of doom, but wiggly, except for the renewed
twitching of his ears, moved neither of body nor tongue. he was too
wise to point out that he had registered this one failure to fifty
successes, or to remind scoggins that no reporter can bat a thousand in
the news-gathering league.

"where you belong," went on the city editor with withering sarcasm,
"is in a side-show tent, along with the rest of the freaks, not in a
newspaper office. as a reporter----" he broke off, as the telephone
rang; mechanically he spun half around in his chair and pulled the
instrument toward him.

"yeah?" he grunted.

etta griggs had chosen this opportune moment to call.

"is this the editor of _the star_?" came her sweetest, most cultured
tones over the wire. scoggins admitted it with a grunt.

"this is miss griggs, the playwright, and i am calling to give you a--a
scoop, i believe you call it."

had it been a busy hour, scoggins would have switched the call over to
his assistant; experience had hardened him to persons calling him up to
give him a scoop. usually they didn't pan out, these scoops.

"what is it, miss griggs?" he inquired with a deference that he never
used toward his staff.

"it--it's very important news," went on etta griggs tremulously, almost
overwhelmed by the realization that she was in conversation with the
great editor of her morning paper. "there has been a murder--a very
prominent family, and i thought you might be interested----"

"i should say i am!" exclaimed scoggins, picking up a pencil and
poising it over a sheet of paper. "what did you say the name was?"

"miss griggs. i am----"

"not your name--the murdered person's name."

"oh, of course! why, mrs. gilmore--the wife of kirklan gilmore, the
famous novelist, you know."

now, as a matter of fact, scoggins didn't know; he didn't read the book
reviews, and gilmore, while he had written a selling book, wasn't
quite so famous as etta imagined.

"you say she has been murdered, miss griggs?" he purred. "where did
this happen?" and, waiting for the reply, he put his hand over the
transmitter as he said out of the corner of his mouth to milne, his
assistant: "who the devil is kirklan gilmore, the novelist? get the
clippings on him outta the reference room. picture of his wife, if
there are any. hurry! we gotta stop the presses and make a lift, if
this pans out."

"ardmore--ardmore-on-the-hudson," went on etta. "the gilmore estate is
greenacres. she was shot--killed. poor thing, they'd only been married
three weeks, too." scoggins' eyebrows went up. in a flash he visualized
the headline, "bride of three weeks slain."

there followed a few rapid-fire questions in which the city editor
had all available information. the constable had been summoned--etta
neglected to state that this constable person was her father--and the
village physician, a doctor bushnell, was at the house.

"fine!" exclaimed scoggins with that inhuman delight with which some
city editors receive the news of a crime. "if you will give your name,
i will have the business office send you a check, and then----"

"oh, no!" cried etta. "but i expect that my play will be coming out
soon, and----"

"certainly--certainly," scoggins murmured mechanically and snapped the
receiver to its hook. "she's a nut," he grunted. "gotta verify this
story before we can use it, but i guess it's safe enough at that.
you, kinsella, call up the gilmore place, ardmore, and ask for doctor
bushnell. you, roddy, bat out a coupla sticks for a lift on page one,
and----" his eyes roved over the now empty city and then back to wiggly
price, who had withdrawn a few feet from the desk. in the pressure of
the moment he forgot that he had been about to fire the reporter with
the animated ears; he only remembered that he needed a good reporter
for a good story, and that jimmy price was a good reporter. he slid
open a drawer of the desk and tossed over a roll of bills.

"here's a hundred dollars for expense money, price," he snapped
crisply. "gilmore place, ardmore. author's wife--bride three
weeks--murdered. may have to take taxi. get pictures--lots of pictures.
gotta hunch this is a good yarn." wiggly's ears wiggled violently,
probably registering his delight that the catastrophe of being fired
had been so narrowly and unexpectedly averted, but caleb scoggins had
turned his vigorous attention to other details of the new story--the
only real piece of local news during the night--and he did not notice.

price grabbed up the expense money and left the city room with discreet
swiftness. less than five minutes later he was in a taxicab, speeding
out broadway toward greenacres.




                             chapter xiii

                          what did joan know?


awaiting the arrival of the constable, doctor bushnell was still in the
den of the greenacres house, while across from him kirklan gilmore sat,
like a man dazed, in one of the great leather chairs, staring vacantly
into space. he had not spoken for almost five minutes.

"so you had to call in the police," he muttered bitterly, breaking the
silence. "they've got to come, snooping through the house, prying into
things, asking questions, badgering, bullying----"

"you're taking the wrong attitude, kirklan," the doctor broke in
gently. "i know how you feel, of course; you abhor the legal procedure,
but a crime has been committed, and the law must function. you would
not want your wife's murderer to escape, would you, no matter what the
price?"

"i can't believe yet, doctor, that it was what you claim--murder,"
protested the novelist with a shudder. "your opinion is based on--just
exactly what?"

"the nature of the wound, kirklan. look, here is my pipe." he produced
from his pocket a straight-stemmed brier, holding it by the bowl. "let
us suppose that this is the pistol. your wife is right-handed? yes, i
supposed as much; imagine any person holding a gun in the right hand
and reaching halfway around their body and shooting themselves under
the left armpit. you can see how absurd that is; even supposing she
might have been left-handed, it is almost as ridiculous."

gilmore debated this a moment.

"i suppose you consider that incontrovertible--medically," he argued,
"but i've got a theory to suggest. i've had to study things a bit along
such lines--the material for my books, you know. my last was a mystery
story."

"helen was lying on the lounge. the gun was heavy, hard for a woman to
handle, as you have said. suppose she used _both_ hands in firing the
pistol; one to support it in range, and the other to press the trigger?"

doctor bushnell toyed with his pipe for a moment; absently he filled it
from a chamois pouch and struck a match.

"it's possible," he admitted, and then he shook his head, adding, "but
improbable. i did work at bellevue in new york, while i was at medical
school. naturally we had some suicide cases. it's a queer thing, but
most of the men shot themselves through the head, while the women aimed
for their heart--perhaps a natural horror of disfiguring their faces.
but, looking back, none of them tried to reach the heart from so far
around at the side. always in front. adding weight to the medical
aspect of it, there are those very significant points that bates
raised. quite an intelligent fellow, that butler of yours. he's been in
the family a long time, hasn't he?"

"more than twenty years, i think; he was much attached to my father."

"it is significant, kirklan, that you and bates found the door standing
open. and the scream--ah, there's the big point! why did she scream?
not because she had reached a decision to end her life. as i consider
the matter, this man sarbella----"

"no!"

"is your friendship for him so blind as that, kirklan? stop and think
things over, man; on the second floor, when the shot was fired, were
only your stepmother, your stepsister, and sarbella. it must have been
one of the three; there is no other explanation!"

as his voice came to a dramatic pause, there was a rap at the door.

"doctor bushnell," came the voice of the butler from the other side of
the panel, "will you answer the telephone? there is a call for you."

the doctor looked puzzled. "there was no ring," he said.

"that is an extension," explained gilmore. "there is no bell in this
room."

"oh, i see," murmured the physician, and, leaning across the table, he
pulled the telephone toward him.

"yes, doctor bushnell speaking," he said. "who--what? where did you get
that information?" a pause. "yes, that is true, but there will be no
further information--positively none. you are quite wasting your time
in pressing these questions." he cut the conversation short by clicking
down the receiver.

gilmore lifted his haggard face in a glance of curiosity. "who was it?"
he wanted to know.

"_the star._ it is really quite amazing how quickly the newspapers get
hold of a thing like this. probably the telephone girl at the village
gave them the tip."

"the newspapers!" groaned gilmore. "the scandal they will make of it.
did--did you tell them that it was murder?"

the doctor nodded.

"they were already in possession of that report, and i verified it.
there's no use kicking against the pricks, kirklan; the best that could
have been done was to keep it out of the papers for a few brief hours.
there will have to be an inquest, you know; that is a public hearing.
it's an ugly situation, but there's no escaping it."

"yes, i suppose you're right," muttered the novelist, "but i want it
expressly understood that no reporters are to be admitted to my house."

"they won't bother you until daylight, i suppose," said doctor
bushnell, little thinking that already a madly speeding taxi was
bearing wiggly price toward greenacres. "they'll descend upon you in
droves with morning, and they're a persistent lot, those chaps."

the two men in the den again lapsed into silence; gilmore's muscles
twitched spasmodically. it looked as if he were about to crack under
the strain.

"i think i will give you an opiate of some sort and then get you in
bed," the physician said gently. "you've about gone your limit, i'm
afraid."

"that reminds me of something," gilmore told him. "my stepmother
fainted; i promised to send you to her when you came. and as for
my going to bed--my room is next to helen's. you couldn't expect
me to spend the rest of the night there. but i will let you give me
something, doctor; i feel as if my body were about to separate into
atoms. yes, give me something that will let me forget--for just a few
hours."

doctor bushnell reached for a compact pocket medicine case and selected
a vial containing some small white pellets.

"the constable ought to be here any moment now," he said. "not that
i expect ham griggs is going to be of very much help to us; catching
speeders is about the limit of his abilities. but he had to be
notified, and in the morning we'll notify the district attorney's
office. we may get an intelligent investigation from that source. ah,
that must be griggs now."

there had reached his ears the sound of the constable's approaching
motor cycle.

"i'll have bates let him in and keep him waiting downstairs until i
have a look at mrs. gilmore. one of these pellets, kirklan, and you'll
be falling asleep in no time."

the doctor left the den and went upstairs, after pausing in the hall
to instruct bates that ham griggs should wait; passing the tragedy
chamber, he tested the door and found it, as he had left it, locked.
then he made his way around the hall toward the room which, from
previous professional calls, he knew to be the elder mrs. gilmore's.
kirklan had neglected to tell him that she had been taken to joan's
part of the house.

ahead a gleam of light sliced out into the hall from a half-open door,
the room occupied by sarbella. the doctor's footsteps were audible,
and the guest of greenacres appeared at the opening.

"you were looking for me?" he inquired.

doctor bushnell paused, wondering if sarbella had left the door open in
an effort to keep in touch with what was going on; a guilty man, it was
reasonable to presume, would be nervously anxious to know the progress
of the investigation, to be forewarned of any suspicion turning in his
direction.

"no, mr. sarbella, i am on my way to mrs. gilmore's room. kirklan has
just told me that she fainted some time since."

"oh, but you're in the wrong part of the house, doctor; gilmore and i
took his stepmother to miss sheridan's room." he paused for a moment,
and then added: "it has been a terrible night for all of us."

"it is a very puzzling business," murmured doctor bushnell.

"very," nodded sarbella.

"how long have you known the--ah--the dead woman?"

the artist hesitated briefly, and when he did reply gave the shrewd
doctor the impression of carefully chosen words.

"i met her last evening for the first time," he said. "i had never met
her before."

"during the dinner," pursued the physician, watching the man's face
closely, "did you notice anything strange?"

sarbella shot him a quick glance. "she may have been depressed,"
he answered evasively. "other than that i can tell you
nothing--absolutely nothing. please do not let me keep you from
attending mrs. gilmore."

the doctor had the baffled feeling that something was being hidden,
that sarbella knew a great deal more than he was willing to tell.
yet he felt that this was the wrong time to ply questions, that
he would only muddle things until he was better fortified for a
cross-examination. so he turned and retraced his steps around the hall
to joan's room.

even before he rapped, he heard the sound of moans, punctuated by a
hysterical rambling of speech. his knuckles descended upon the panel,
and joan promptly admitted him. mrs. gilmore tossed upon the bed like a
woman in physical pain.

"i am glad you have come, doctor bushnell," murmured joan. "mother is
almost beside herself with the horror of it."

"kirklan was so upset that he didn't tell me until just a moment ago.
your mother fainted, i believe."

"yes, she was awakened by the shot and went to investigate. she
saw--her."

"i knew something was going to happen!" moaned mrs. gilmore. "it was in
the air. i felt it--impending disaster. every one acted so strange."
there she broke off into wild weeping. the doctor reached for mrs.
gilmore's wrist and took her pulse. he decided that it was safe enough
to administer a soothing hypodermic. when this had been done, and the
morphia had taken effect, bushnell turned to joan.

"what does she mean by saying that she felt something was going to
happen?" he asked. "did you notice anything peculiar in the behavior of
kirklan's wife last night?"

joan hesitated, twisting her fingers and biting her lip. "i--i don't
think she was quite herself," she answered, her voice very low. "she
seemed greatly worried."

"and the guest, mr. sarbella?"

a gasp escaped the girl's lips, as she gave the physician a startled,
wide-eyed stare. "why--why do you ask about him?" she whispered.

"joan, you are holding back something, and you have no right to do
that. this atmosphere of secrecy, concealment--what does it mean?
you are a sensible girl, and i feel that i can tell you something
confidentially. kirklan's wife did not end her own life."

standing near the foot of the bed, one of the girl's hands clutched at
the rail.

"kirklan said that--that she had--killed herself. so you think that she
was shot by some one else? what makes you think that?"

"without going into the unpleasant details, it would have been
practically impossible for her to have shot herself in such a manner.
and there was her scream. you didn't hear it?"

joan's face was white.

"n-no," she stammered. "i--i did not hear helen scream."

"scream she did--a terrible scream of terror, according to bates.
added to that, the door of her room was found open, and--it was bates
who suggested it--people do not scream when they are about to kill
themselves."

the girl's lips moved soundlessly as if she were trying to speak but
could not find the words.

her eyes refused to meet his, and the physician had a baffled,
apprehensive feeling that she knew something she was very unwilling to
tell. her attitude was one of terrified concealment. was she trying to
protect some one? or was she trying to protect herself? what did joan
know?

"but," she said, after this tense pause, "you--you don't think that mr.
sarbella----"

doctor bushnell lifted his hands in a helpless gesture. "i don't
know what to think," he replied. "from what i have gathered there is
something under the surface and----"

before he could complete the sentence ham griggs' voice bawled from
down the hall:

"hey, doc! where are you?"

the constable was not disposed to bide his time downstairs; officially
important, he had brushed the butler aside and mounted the stairs
in search of the physician. joan drew a breath of relief and doctor
bushnell frowned.

"that's constable griggs," he said; "he's looking for me. isn't there
something you can tell me, joan, that will throw some light on the
tragedy?"

"nothing," she answered faintly, "absolutely nothing. only--i feel very
positive that mr. sarbella did not do it."

"doc! where the thunder are you, anyhow?" again ham griggs' raucous
bellow, edged with impatience, boomed through the upper hall. the
physician turned toward the door, having no choice but to respond.
joan's attitude troubled him. why did she express such a positive
conviction of sarbella's innocence, the most obvious suspect?

he found griggs around the turn in the hall, stern and grim.

"this is a fine howdy-do," griggs rumbled, "keepin' an officer of the
law coolin' his heels, when there's murder been done, an' there's
a murderer to be put under arrest." his hand moved in his pocket,
jingling a pair of handcuffs. "who done it, doc?"

doctor bushnell sighed wearily, realizing that the constable was going
to be a difficult person to deal with. there is nothing more trying
than official bigotry.

"that's the job in front of us--to ferret that out," he answered.

"reckon gilmore----"

"no, gilmore was downstairs talking to the butler when the shot was
fired," broke in the doctor. briefly he related the facts, as he had
found them, but he confined himself strictly to facts, and indulged
in no theories or suspicions; he was afraid to trust ham griggs with
theories.

the constable listened, rocking his heavy body on his heels and
frowning sternly.

"hum!" he grunted when the other paused. "where's the body?"

"i'll take you there," the latter answered. "i locked the room--didn't
want anything disturbed, of course." he took the key from his pocket
and led the way to the tragedy chamber.

for all of his outward bluster, ham griggs was inwardly nervous and
uncertain, for this was his first murder case.




                              chapter xiv

                     the girl in the sarbella case


as doctor bushnell unlocked the door and snapped on the lights,
the constable was close upon his heels, staring at the lounge with
its sheet-shrouded burden. from beneath the edge of the white linen
covering, where it almost touched the floor, was the automatic pistol.

"do you know anything about finger prints?" asked the physician. "i
thought there might be finger prints on the grip of the gun; but i
doubt it. the weapon was left behind to give the appearance of suicide;
the murderer, being deliberate as that, would hardly have been fool
enough to leave his signature behind him."

ham griggs neither admitted nor denied knowledge of the finger-print
science; as a matter of fact, he knew precious little about it, but
that did not deter him from stepping promptly forward, with great show
of confidence, and picking the pistol up by the barrel. he did have
gumption enough for that.

stepping close to the electric light burning from one of the wall
brackets, he turned the gun slowly, examining the butt plates at
various angles.

"gotta have a smooth surface, doc, to get finger prints," he grunted,
tapping the corrugated rubber with his finger. "there ain't any--no,
sir, there just natcherally ain't any."

doctor bushnell nodded. "you're right about that," he agreed.

"guess i better keep this for evidence," said griggs, handling it
gingerly; ignorant of an automatic's mechanism, he did not know just
how easily it might be discharged.

"careful there!" warned the doctor. "it's ready for firing; the
explosion, you know, ejects the shell and throws back the plunger for
another shot. there's a safety catch on the side; i'll attend to it for
you."

griggs willingly surrendered the gun and glanced around the room.

"don't look like there'd been no scuffle," he muttered. "none of the
chairs is turned over, or nothin' like that. don't seem like there is
any clews."

doctor bushnell handed back the gun. "i understand that there are
always clews, griggs. no doubt there are plenty of them right here, but
our eyes aren't trained for seeing them. we're just overlooking them,
that's all, and i am afraid that we shall continue to overlook them.
this is a job for a detective--a real detective."

ham griggs looked resentful.

"just you hold your horses a little while, doc," he growled. "gimme a
chance, can't you? you don't expect me to clear this thing up in the
battin' of an eye, do you? mebbe if i'd been on the ground long as you
have, an' talked to all the folks in the house, like you've done, i'd
have got somewheres by this time."

"yes--maybe," murmured doctor bushnell.

"well, anyhow," retorted the constable, "i allow to ask a heap of
questions. i ain't gonna stand here suckin' my thumb. where's gilmore?"

"i gave him an opiate, griggs; the poor chap's a nervous
wreck--naturally. give him a chance to pull himself together. it would
be rank cruelty to subject him to an inquisition until he's had an
opportunity to come out from under the first shock. remember, he had
been married but a few weeks; a terrible blow, griggs."

"who else did you say was in the house?"

"bates, the butler, the elder mrs. gilmore, miss joan sheridan, mrs.
gilmore's daughter by her first marriage, and a mr. sarbella, a
guest from new york. mrs. gilmore is in a state bordering on nervous
prostration, and, as her physician, i should certainly refuse to admit
her to be questioned just now."

"seems like to me," grunted the constable, suspicion in his voice,
"they don't mebbe want to be questioned. the other three--they got
prostrations, too?"

"no; there is nothing to prevent your cross-examining the others."

"the butler feller, you said he was downstairs with gilmore when the
gun was shot off?"

"yes, that's right."

"an' that the two womenfolks an' this--whatcha say his name is?"

"sarbella, victor sarbella."

"sounds dago. so you say that sarbella an' the two women was upstairs?"
in his slow-witted, blundering way, ham griggs was arriving at the
obvious. "that bein' the case, doc, i guess--hum--i reckon we better
have a look at this sarbella. i hope you ain't give him no chance to
escape?"

"i'll call him," responded doctor bushnell, "but do you want to
question him here?"

"best place i can think of, doc; if he done it he'll kinda give himself
away by bein' in the presence of the victim."

"up to date," imparted the physician, "sarbella thinks we believe she
took her own life."

"that's good; we'll spring a surprise on 'im. go get 'im, doc."

when bushnell had responded to this command, ham griggs stepped to the
lounge and drew back the edge of the sheet, staring at the beautiful
face below him. he was surprised at the woman's beauty.

"sure was a swell looker," he said to himself and drew the sheet back
in place. with his stubby, thick fingers clasped behind his back, he
took a turn across the room, so intent with his sluggish thoughts
that he did not notice the trodding of his heavy shoes upon a bit of
dark porcelain that lay upon the rug near the table which stood by
the north wall--a bit of porcelain no larger than a silver dollar. it
splintered beneath his weight, with a faintly crunching sound. in his
preoccupation he did not hear it.

a moment later doctor bushnell had returned with victor sarbella. ham
griggs turned and stared intently at the guest of greenacres, who had
himself well under control.

"the doctor tells me that you wish to see me," murmured sarbella. "i am
at your service."

"you betcha i want to see you," grunted the constable, motioning to a
chair that faced the sheet-covered lounge. "what do you know about this
case?"

sarbella let himself into the indicated chair, facing the shrouded body
without flinching. "nothing," he answered steadily.

griggs whipped the automatic from his pocket and thrust it before the
man's eyes with what might have been considered an accusing gesture.

"ever see this before?" he demanded, and, when sarbella nodded, he went
on with a triumphant exclamation: "oh, you admit it, do you?"

"yes," answered the artist, "i saw it on the floor, where it must have
fallen from her hand, after she shot herself."

"she didn't do no such thing," the constable retorted belligerently.
"it was murder."

sarbella's head jerked up, and his hands suddenly froze rigidly
about the arms of the chair. into his intense black eyes there came
a startled, narrow-lidded gleam that doctor bushnell, watching him
closely, decided could have been guilt. but he recovered himself
quickly.

"i don't believe it," he said flatly. "i begin to understand. you are
hinting that i----"

"matter of fact, now, ain't this your gun?" broke in ham griggs. "no
use lyin'; we can trace it easy enough."

sarbella did not become angry; he did not bluster.

"i do not know what has given you this ridiculous idea," he said
quietly, "but i shall make a statement that, in so far as i am
concerned, covers everything. the gun is not mine; i have never seen
the gun until, aroused by the pistol shot, i saw gilmore's wife dead.
never in my life had i ever seen the woman until i was introduced to
her before dinner last evening. it did not for a moment enter my mind
that it was other than suicide. if, as you claim, it is murder, i did
not do it, and i do not know who did, or why. that is all i have to
say." his tone had a firm finality that was discouraging to further
questioning; over the room there fell a silence, a silence so tense and
absorbed that none of the three men heard the automobile that sped into
the greenacres driveway and came to a halt beneath the portico.

constable griggs reached behind him and drew the sheet from the dead
woman's face. even the bosom of her crimson-stained silk robe was
exposed to view. but no cry of guilty horror came from sarbella; in
fact, he seemed a little contemptuous of this dramatic play. his face
was stonily hard.

below, the taxicab bearing wiggly, otherwise jimmy price, had arrived
at greenacres, and wiggly, bidding the driver wait, leaped across the
porch to the entrance. his finger pressed the bell button with one
brief, curt ring. he waited grimly.

now, wiggly price was wise in the ways of his craft; he knew that
in a case like this, among such people, a reporter is emphatically
unwelcome. from countless previous experiences he had learned that the
big thing is to keep the door from being slammed in one's face. there
was an old trick that he had used with success before; possibly it was
chicanery, but the good reporter must get the story to hold his job.
there are times when the exigency of the situation demands a blind
eye toward strict ethics, and he knew that, unless he made good on the
gilmore murder yarn, scoggins would complete the fatefully interrupted
business of firing him.

there had been a day when new york newspaper men were given neat
nickeled and numbered badges, issued by the police department to
identify them in getting past the police lines at fires, parades, and
the like. they looked official, these badges, and, although they had
long since been withdrawn by the department, wiggly price had retained
his; that word "police" stamped upon the metal in much larger lettering
than "press" had more than once been the open sesame for him.

so when bates, the gilmore butler, opened the door in answer to the
ring, wiggly price flipped back the lapel of his coat so that the
servant might be misled by the brief flash and glisten of the metal.

"i'm here on the case," wiggly announced briskly, knowing full well
that if he revealed his true identity he would get about so far as "i
am a reporter." then the door would have closed in his face.

bates readily admitted him. "doctor bushnell is expecting you?"

wiggly, having no notion of committing himself, evaded the question.

"hum!" he said. "bad business, i understand. how long since it
happened? i'll hear what you know about it before i see doctor
bushnell."

thus bates, who would have let his tongue be cut out before he would
have divulged so much as a grain of information to a reporter,
was misled into telling all he knew. thinking he was talking to
a detective summoned by the doctor, he pridefully told of his own
deductions of murder; he omitted nothing, and jimmy price's animated
ears wiggled delightedly, as he realized how lucky he was.

"fine!" he murmured. "you're a pretty good detective yourself. now just
between us--strictly confidential, y' understand--who do you think
killed her?"

bates looked around cautiously, and then lowered his voice to a mere
thread of a whisper.

"things began to be queer, sir, after mr. sarbella arrived. mind you,
i don't say that he did it, but----" his voice tailed off meaningly.
jimmy price's ears moved rapidly--swift thinking.

"sarbella?" he said under his breath. "sarbella? i've heard that name
somewhere before." and then aloud: "where is the doctor now?"

"upstairs with the constable; i think they are in the room where it
happened. who shall i tell him is here, sir?"

"oh, don't bother about that," wiggly price said carelessly. "i'll go
right on up. no, don't bother. which room?"

"at the head of the stairs."

"gee, but i'm one lucky bird!" chuckled wiggly, as he hurried up the
steps. "now what's going to happen? get pitched out on my ear, most
likely."

reaching the top of the stairway, there was no need for him to seek
further directions. the door of the tragedy chamber was not fully
closed, and there came to his ears the voice of constable griggs,
badgeringly insistent, as he sought in vain to batter down victor
sarbella's brief statement.

the guest of greenacres remained calm. "i have told you all that i can
about the case--the murder, as you insist," he was saying. "i have
nothing more to say."

wiggly edged closer to the crack of the door, peering within, and saw
the face of the dead woman across which griggs had not replaced the
sheet. as he stared, his ears began to wiggle violently. without any
more hesitation he walked into the room. ham griggs looked up with a
hostile and questioning frown.

"who're you?" he barked. "where'd you come from?"

"price, price of _the star_," wiggly murmured mechanically, as he
continued staring at helen gilmore.

doctor bushnell took an angry step forward. "mr. gilmore issued
specific instructions that no newspaper men were to be admitted," he
said. "i don't know how you managed to get in, but i know how you're
going to get out."

"wait a minute!" muttered the reporter. "i've seen her somewhere. i
never forget faces, and she----wait a minute, i tell you, and i'll
place her. let a fellow think, can't you!" he moved a little closer,
staring at the beautiful features. victor sarbella had strained forward
in his chair, and there was something so tense in his attitude that
doctor bushnell signaled to the constable that the intruding newspaper
man was not to be interfered with for a moment. the constable did not
notice that; he seemed little short of hypnotized by price's animated
ears.

"she must have figured in some story that i worked on," went on jimmy
price, hardly conscious that he was thinking aloud. "and it must have
been some time ago, or i wouldn't have so much trouble remembering."

the doctor made a suggestion that bore more fruit than he could have
expected.

"take a look at this gentleman," he said, pointing to the artist; "you
don't happen to remember him, i suppose?"

jimmy price shook his head slowly and positively. "i am quite sure," he
answered, "that i have never seen mr.--mr.----"

"mr. sarbella," supplied the doctor.

the effect of that name on jimmy price was startling. it seemed that
his ears would surely work themselves loose from the side of his head.

"sarbella?" he exclaimed, turning swiftly and looking again at the dead
woman. "sarbella? yes, i know her now; she was the girl--the girl in
the sarbella case!"

a grunt of elation escaped constable griggs, as he stared triumphantly
at the artist; this reporter had supplied the missing link between
the dead woman and the suspect. victor sarbella's body stiffened and
relaxed, as his shoulders moved with a sigh of weariness and defeat.
the secret which he had guarded with his silence was out.




                              chapter xv

                            sarbella speaks


no longer was wiggly price an interloper, an unwelcome intruder facing
eviction; for, instead of asking for facts, he was supplying facts, and
extremely vital facts they seemed to be. both the constable and doctor
bushnell, since the sarbella case stirred no memories, were both eager
for further enlightenment.

"yes," said wiggly, "i am sure of it now; this woman was the girl in
the sarbella case. i think i must have written five or six columns
about it; queer that i shouldn't have spotted her the minute i put eyes
on her, but a fellow's memory does slip sometimes. the minute i heard
the name just now it all came back to me with a rush."

"i knew you was hidin' something," grunted constable griggs, fixing
victor sarbella with a stern eye. "i had a feelin' that you was lyin'
about never havin' set eyes on 'er until last night. i guess you killed
her, all right--that was the reason you wouldn't talk. guess you
thought you was pretty slick." he turned to the newspaper man. "i guess
it wasn't nothin' short of providence that let you get into the house
just now. queer, ain't it, how things is always turnin' out?"

"my statement," said sarbella, his voice husky, "was entirely true. i
had never seen the woman until last night--when my friend introduced
her as--as hees wife. she--she the wife of my good friend!"

"i guess you think we're a lotta country boobs to swaller a thin yarn
like that. never seen her before, huh? that's likely--i guess not."

doctor bushnell looked eagerly at wiggly price, impatient to hear what
was meant by "the sarbella case."

"let's hear what he's got to say, griggs," he urged.

"sure," nodded ham griggs; "talk right up, mister. i guess we're all
wantin' to hear it--except sarbella. you've put us on a hot trail, all
right, young feller."

"for all i know," said the reporter, "he may be telling the truth about
never having seen the woman before. it sounds reasonable enough, as you
shall see.

"the sarbella case got into the newspapers a little over two years
ago. there was a young chap--handsome kid he was--a violinist. born in
italy--forget what place--and came to new york in concert work. his
first name"--he frowned meditatively--"i think it was andrea."

"yes, it was andrea," muttered victor sarbella. "poor andrea! and that
woman--death was too good for her!"

"he fell in with a girl, a beautiful girl, with bronze hair. the
attraction of opposites, i suppose; he was dark--naturally, being
italian. but this girl's past wasn't as pretty as her face. a lot of it
is coming back to me now--the details. she'd been raised on the fringe
of the underworld. maybe you know what i mean. her father and her
brother had served time. oh, not her; she tried to pull away from that
sort of thing.

"anyhow, the young violinist fell in love with this girl, madly in love
with her. i think they were planning to be married, and then he found
out the truth about her. how? i can't tell you that, but he did. the
note he left behind him told that--how she had lied to him, deceived
him.

"he went into the bathroom of his hotel and shot himself through the
heart. you see, this young sarbella came of a very proud family--his
father related to the nobility and all that sort of thing. he couldn't
marry a girl like that, and he couldn't give her up. there was only one
way he could forget her, and he took that way.

"in brief, gentlemen, that's the sarbella case. the girl disappeared;
the police didn't hold her, since it was so obviously a suicide. i saw
her at the inquest; she seemed pretty badly cut up over it, but--well,
you can't always tell about that."

"my word!" whispered doctor bushnell, aghast. "kirklan gilmore's
wife was that woman, a woman of the underworld? it seems incredible,
preposterous!"

"sarbella," went on wiggly price, looking steadily at the guest
of greenacres, "had a brother who was in italy at the time of the
suicide. this brother caught the first boat to new york with the avowed
intention----"

"i think that i am the best qualified person to finish your narrative,"
the voice of victor sarbella broke in.

"so you've decided to start your tongue workin'," crowed constable
griggs; his chest bulged importantly. "it is my official duty to warn
you that anything you may say will be used against you."

sarbella waved his hand impatiently. "this is an explanation, not a
confession," he retorted. "my first statement to you remains true,
although i admit that i did not tell you all the truth--for two reasons.

"yes, this dead woman," his voice dripped with bitterness, "was the
girl in the sarbella case. it is necessary for me to tell you that
andrea, my younger brother, and i were born and reared in florence. our
mother was american, our father italian.

"i came to america where i could find a better market for my drawings,
and i brought with me andrea, who was a violinist and expected to
earn a great deal of money with his playing. he had wonderful talent,
andrea; even so young, his playing was attracting attention. would to
heaven that i had left him in italy. then that woman would never have
set his brain on fire, driven him mad with the madness of infatuation.

"it was the first winter that we were in new york, and i returned to
florence that i might accompany my mother back to america. she, too,
was to make her home in new york, my father having died. it was while
i was away that andrea met this devil of a woman. how? i do not know,
but he loved her madly; the letter he left behind for me told me the
intensity of his passion for her.

"andrea was young, idealistic; he thought her everything that was good,
noble. and then there came to him a man; a low, common person, who was
the woman's husband!

"you see how she had tricked him? she was not the innocent, lovely girl
she had led my brother to believe. he had thought to marry her--soon.
the shock of the truth dethroned reason; he could not have her, and he
could not give her up. there seemed to him only one way that he could
forget.

"if i could but show you his farewell letter to me, the letter that
he wrote a few minutes before he fired the bullet through his heart!"
tears came into victor sarbella's eyes, and his voice trembled and
broke. "could you read that letter of andrea's you would understand
better.

"he was my brother, my only brother, and i loved him devotedly. news of
his death was cabled to me, but it was not until the boat docked in new
york that i knew how he had died--and why.

"my mother--andrea was her very life. she--it killed her. this woman,
this vampire, killed both of them--andrea and our mother--as surely as
though she had driven daggers into their hearts. and that--that would
have been a kindlier way." he pointed a dramatically accusing finger to
the couch. "there she is, a murderess, a moral murderess, and she has
reaped as she had sown!"

victor sarbella's voice came to a pause.

"all right," said constable griggs, "let's have the rest of it. you
killed her for revenge!"

"a life for a life!" murmured wiggly price, his ears twitching again,
as he thought of a dramatic line for this amazing story that he was to
write for _the star_. "'the code of latin vengeance!' wow! what a whale
of a yarn!"

victor sarbella shook his head slowly.

"time passes, and the deepest of wounds heal--although there may be a
scar," he said. "it is futile for me to deny that in my first grief
and rage against this woman i made bitter threats, that i said i would
hound her down and make her pay. i do not deny that i meant it--at the
moment; i do not deny that i sought her in vain."

"but you did find her yesterday," exclaimed constable griggs. "i've
heard tell of them eyetalian vendettas. you hadda wait most three
years, but you got 'er all right. ain't no use holdin' out on me no
longer, mister sarbella; we gotcha, an' we gotcha cold. mebbe you can
get by with that revenge business over in italy, but you can't work it
here."

victor sarbella looked tired, and his face was drawn, haggard.

"yes, i found her here yesterday," he nodded. "i found her--this
murderess--married to my good friend, who loved her madly--as poor
andrea loved her. while i had never seen her, i knew her from that
picture of her that lay beside andrea when he died. every detail of
that face was burned into my memory; i recognized her instantly. and
she--the name and the family resemblance--she, too, knew me for who i
am.

"kirklan gilmore saw that something was wrong, but i could not tell
him. he was my friend; she was his wife; my lips were sealed. i swear
to you that no thought of killing her entered my mind, although in the
past i had thought many times of putting my fingers about her throat
and----"

"huh!" broke in ham griggs' grunt. "i guess you'd swear to most
anything to keep yourself from goin' to the chair. what made you hold
out on us about knowin' who she was, if you wasn't guilty?"

"as i told you a few minutes ago," answered sarbella, "there were two
reasons. one was that i wished to spare gilmore, my friend, the torture
of the truth."

"and the other reason," said griggs, "was that you knowed blame well it
would make things look purty black for you. you knowed that it would
throw suspicion square on you."

sarbella hesitated.

"at first," he replied slowly, "i had no other thought than that the
woman had ended her life--driven to suicide by fear, fear that i would
denounce her for what she was before her husband; but, when the butler
kept insisting that she had been murdered, i knew that i had a vitally
personal reason for keeping silent."

"but little good it did you--thanks to this feller," exulted the
constable, jerking his thumb toward the newspaper man. "victor
sarbella, you're under arrest for----"

"be careful, sir--be careful," warned the guest of greenacres, his face
gray. "the gun is not mine, and you will never be able to prove that it
was. if you subject me to false arrest----"

ham griggs hesitated, glancing at doctor bushnell for encouragement.

"i don't think you need worry about false arrest," advised the doctor.
"an officer has a perfect right to hold a man on suspicion. there need
not be positive proof, and there were but three persons on the second
floor when the shot was fired--mrs. gilmore, miss joan, and sarbella."

victor sarbella leaned forward in his chair, and he seemed on the verge
of saying something further in his own defense, but did not speak. it
may have been that he realized how useless it would be to say anything
further in his own behalf.

the constable dragged from his pocket a pair of handcuffs. "stick
out your mitts," he ordered, holding open the steel jaws to receive
sarbella's wrists.




                              chapter xvi

                            the four clews


as constable griggs, proud as a pouter pigeon, departed with his
prisoner, doctor bushnell replaced the sheet over the face of the dead
woman, but not until he had looked again at the beautiful features,
shaking his head, as if he could not understand the anomaly of
countenance and character.

"a--a woman of the underworld! it's just a little hard to believe that
a woman with that face----"

"on the fringe of the underworld, i think i said," corrected wiggly
price. "her associations were criminal, but i hardly imagine that she
had led a vicious life, for that _would_ show." he paused for a moment.
"sarbella told me something about her that i hadn't known before--that
it was her husband who came to andrea sarbella and told him the truth
about her. i was just wondering if--if she had gone to the trouble of
divorcing him. it's a difficult thing, getting a divorce in new york
state."

doctor bushnell looked grave. "sarbella was right; she was a vampire.
she tricked gilmore, fooled him with her pretty face, as she fooled the
other one--young sarbella. i am apprehensive of the effect that this
is going to have on kirklan; already he is on the verge of a nervous
breakdown, and when he learns the truth--well, i hope it can be
withheld from him until he has had a chance to pull together." he made
a move to depart, but wiggly stopped him with a gesture.

"just a moment, doctor. you're satisfied that sarbella did the
shooting?"

the physician seemed surprised by the question.

"certainly," he answered promptly. "there were but five persons in the
house; two of them downstairs, three upstairs, when the fatal shot
was fired. you don't mean to tell me that you have any doubts----" he
broke off, disturbed by the recollection of joan's evasiveness and
perturbation.

"i'm not saying sarbella isn't the guilty man," answered wiggly; "but i
do say that it would be next to impossible to have a jury convict him
on such evidence."

"but he was the only person in the house who could have any possible
motive for the crime," argued doctor bushnell. "revenge, young man--a
trait that is strong with the latins, particularly the italian. you
don't for a moment entertain a notion that mrs. gilmore, the gentlest
soul i have ever known, or miss sheridan----"

"i admit the motive," interrupted wiggly; "i admit the opportunity, and
i admit that, on the face of things so far, he is the guilty man. but
where is the proof--the proof that will convict him before a jury?

"the proof of guilt is somewhere--somewhere in this house; it may be
right in this room. i have been a newspaper reporter for ten years, and
a lot of my assignments have been crime stories. i did headquarters for
nearly five years; experience tells me that there are clews, definite
and convincing clews, that will convict. there are always clews."

"yes, so i have gathered; but the room here--there is no evidence of a
struggle--nothing visible----"

"the same things, doctor, are not visible to all eyes; seeing a clew
is one thing, and observing it is quite another thing. a newspaper
reporter gets to be a sort of detective, sometimes he's a darn good
detective, and, if you have no objection, i'll look around a bit and
see what i can find to clinch the case against sarbella."

doctor bushnell hesitated. "kirklan gilmore gave orders that no
newspaper men were to be admitted," he said; "still you have rendered
valuable assistance, and----"

"and," added wiggly with a faint smile, "i've already got my story.
even if you pitch me out, it won't stop my paper from printing the
facts that i have gathered."

"yes, that's true," nodded the physician, "and personally i've a
profound respect for a good newspaper reporter. gilmore naturally
shrinks from the thought of having this thing blazoned across the front
page; but, if he understood the situation, i feel sure that he would
give you every chance to fix the guilt where it belongs. he seemed
to resent the suggestion i made, that sarbella was the most obvious
suspect, but he did not know the past which linked the lives of his
wife and his friend.

"the constable is little better than helpless in a case like this;
his job is catching automobile speeders, and a murder is outside of
his experience. it was nothing short of luck for ham griggs that you
happened in and gave him the right tack. i intended urging gilmore to
employ a private detective, but if you can make any progress--well, i
shan't stop you."

"that's mighty decent of you, doctor bushnell, and, before i start in
sherlocking, i'd like to ask you a question or two about the wound. the
bullet pierced her heart?"

"no, it did not; i followed the course of the bullet with a probe, and
it missed the heart by a fraction of an inch."

"good lord, you don't mean it! then death was caused----"

"from the best i can determine, a punctured artery."

"in other words, she bled to death; isn't that what you mean, doctor?"

"yes."

"would she have bled to death so quickly?"

"that is hard to say--evidently very quickly. both gilmore and the
butler are positive that she was dead when they reached the room here.
they rushed upstairs immediately after hearing her scream and the shot."

"and that was a matter of less than minutes--seconds," mused wiggly
price. "the bullet must have pierced the aorta, or one of its main
branches."

"so it would seem, and i see that you know the anatomical terms."

"some of them; a reporter has to know a little about everything. i was
just wondering if perhaps she wasn't still alive when her husband and
the butler reached the room."

"bates thought he saw the last breath leave her body, but i wouldn't
accept that with absolute finality. he is, of course, not a medical
man, and he might have easily imagined it."

wiggly price's eyes searched the room with a slowly moving gaze, his
animated ears twitching faintly. he seemed to be studying the rug,
which was of a neutral shade; any discolorment, such as a bloodstain,
would have stood out glaringly, and there was none.

"i've been thinking," he said, "that she might have been placed on the
couch there--after she was shot. yet, with all the profuse bleeding, if
she had fallen to the floor there would be some signs of it. i wonder
if you noticed whether she was shot while reclining on the lounge, or
if the bullet was fired while she was standing?"

the doctor looked bewildered. "great heavens, man, how could you expect
me to know that?" he exclaimed with a hint of asperity, suspecting that
the reporter was trying to "show off." but he was mistaken about that.

"i feel that we may be able to determine that, if we take another look
at the dead woman's clothing," wiggly told him. "there's the law of
gravity you know."

"gravity? what's the law of gravity got to do with it?" puzzled, the
physician lifted the sheet to permit the reporter's examination. the
latter leaned forward for a moment and took note, also, that the silk
robe was powder burned--in fact, that the explosion had been so close
as to scorch the undergarments as well.

wiggly price pointed to the meandering line of dried crimson which
dyed the expensive dressing gown almost to the fur-edged hem of the
garment. "blood, like water," he said, "must obey the law of gravity
and flow downward; she had to be standing on her feet for the crimson
stream to seep down, almost level with her ankles. she was placed on
the lounge by whoever shot her; that is evident. gad, but she was
a beautiful woman, wasn't she? it's no wonder that men lost their
heads over her. you know, doctor, i've always felt sorry for a truly
beautiful woman; so many of them end up in misery. but that's neither
here nor there. the wound is in the side, isn't it?"

doctor bushnell nodded slowly. "i understand now what you're getting
at. yes, i can see that she must have been shot while standing on
her feet, and either she staggered back to the couch herself, or was
supported to the couch by the slayer. the wound--under the armpit?"

"the weapon must have been pressed close to her body judging from the
evidence of burned powder. i see that the robe was set on fire, which
burned quite a hole before it smoldered out. doctor, wouldn't you say
that it was a most unusual place for an intentionally mortal wound? her
arm would have to have been raised away from her body."

the doctor agreed with a tight-lipped "yes."

"of course," went on the newspaper man, "she might have turned
suddenly, squirmed in the slayer's grip--i am taking it for granted
that he was close enough to have seized her--but that's only
speculation. what became of the gun?"

"ham griggs took it with him. it was an automatic, a large-caliber .44,
i think."

"finger prints?"

"the butt plates had a corrugated surface."

"i see; in that case there would have been no finger prints on the gun.
probably wouldn't have been, since the slayer deliberately left the gun
behind. only a very stupid person would have neglected to wipe away
finger prints had there been any. hello, what's this!"

wiggly's foot had crunched against a bit of porcelain, and he leaned
forward swiftly, picking it up; it was a rough-surfaced piece of
pottery, black in color and, as much as he could judge from the
fragment, had belonged to some convex object of which it was a
shattered part.

"a broken piece of something--but what?" he murmured, holding it up for
the doctor's inspection.

"i'm sure i couldn't say," answered doctor bushnell, who was not
greatly interested. he considered it a waste of time to speculate over
such an insignificant trifle, when there was murder evidence to be
looked for.

"the hitchcock murder last summer--remember that, doctor? it was solved
by nothing more noticeable than a black pin, a mourning pin, and the
widow of a man whom hitchcock had ruined, confessed when she was faced
with that pin. this is larger than a pin, doctor, but, to be frank, i
doubt there's much value to it." he was near a small mahogany table by
the room's north wall; the light was not very good, the chamber being
lighted only by wall fixtures, and the incandescent rays were softened
by parchment shades; but his eyes pierced the shadows and saw, on the
floor beside the table, several other pieces like the one which he held
in his hand.

"ah!" he exclaimed. "here's the answer to it, doctor. it's a vase, a
black pottery vase; yes, here's the neck of it."

"that might be evidence of a struggle," suggested doctor bushnell.
"the vase might have been knocked off the edge of the table, don't
you think, when the woman tried to escape sarbella's vengeance? she
probably knew, the minute he got into the room, that his intention was
to kill her."

price's ears wiggled briefly, as he considered the matter of the broken
vase, and with a dismissing gesture tossed down the broken bit which he
held in his fingers.

"you may be right," he agreed, "it doesn't seem important enough
to bother about, but----" his voice broke off sharply, as he stared
toward the window directly in front of him; he had noticed the sagging
curtain, where it had been ripped some two and a half hours earlier,
when don haskins had made his surprise entrance into helen's room. but,
of course, wiggly had no way of being aware of the fleeing crook's
existence.

"take a look at this, doctor bushnell," said the reporter; "this torn
curtain. funny we didn't notice that before; it's mighty near jerked
off the rod."

"and what do you make of that?"

wiggly's eyes were meditatively half closed, and his ears as well as
his mind were active.

"i'd say one of three things," he answered slowly. "either the murderer
barred mrs. gilmore's flight through the door, and she was trying to
get out the window--which somehow i don't take much stock in--or the
murderer himself came in through the window, or, thirdly, that he
got out through the window. in the last two cases it doesn't seem
reasonable that he would have taken the time to shut the window behind
him. it seems to me that the best thing to do is just store this away
for future reference. it doesn't seem to mean much in itself."

"no, it doesn't," grunted the physician. "it might not have been torn
to-night."

wiggly glanced about the neat, precisely kept room. "she was particular
about the orderliness of things," he said. "i don't believe she would
have left a torn window curtain unrepaired for long. no, the curtain
was torn to-night; but, as i said, we'll just store that away for
future reference."

and then doctor bushnell made a discovery of his own, a half-burned
cigarette that had been mashed down into the heavy nap of the rug, some
eight feet from the chaise longue and even a farther distance from the
door. he gave a brief exclamation, as he pointed to his find.

"sarbella is a cigarette smoker; if this is his brand----"

wiggly price picked up the cigarette, which evidently had been
flattened out beneath the pressure of a shoe.

"it's a little hard to believe, doctor, that a man with premeditated
murder in his mind, would walk into his victim's room smoking a
cigarette," he said quickly. "for that matter, it might be the murdered
woman's cigarette--so many women do smoke 'em these modern days." he
examined the flattened thing which, as it happened, bore the name of
the brand. "cheap--ten cents a pack. hardly a woman's cigarette, i'd
say. perhaps gilmore himself dropped it."

"not gilmore; i happen to know that he doesn't smoke anything except
an occasional after-dinner cigar; but i do recall very clearly that
sarbella was smoking a cigarette downstairs. if he smokes that kind,
it's clinching proof that he is the guilty man!" the doctor was
becoming quite excited over this clew. "since gilmore doesn't smoke
them, who else could have dropped it on the rug? answer me that!"

wiggly took a piece of copy paper from his pocket, carefully wrapped
the cigarette butt in it, and tucked this important, or unimportant,
bit of evidence in his vest pocket.

"as you say, doctor, if it's sarbella's brand of cigarette it means
something--but it's rather difficult to imagine a chap like sarbella
smoking this cheap fag; just about as hard as it is to imagine him
walking into this room, a gun in one hand and a cigarette in another,
ready to avenge his dead brother. however, when i get to the jail, i'll
see the constable and check up on this. i'll have a look at sarbella's
cigarette case."

although, as he had just said, it hardly looked like the sort of
cigarette a woman might be expected to smoke, he was thorough enough to
look about the room, and he even went to the dressing table in search
of any proof that helen gilmore herself had been addicted to a little
puffing now and then. but there was no telltale flickings of ashes, not
so much as an ash receiver.

wiggly compressed his lips.

"you know, doctor," he said slowly, "this cigarette thing bothers me
a little--quite a little, too. she isn't a smoker unless she does it
on the sly and----oh, confound it, it just isn't reasonable that this
is sarbella's cigarette butt. i've got a hunch that this business runs
deeper than we think."

doctor bushnell gave an impatient gesture. "stuff! you're trying
to manufacture a mystery; the papers like mysteries so that they
can spread the story out over days and days. you're afraid that the
solution is going to be too easy, too tame."

"tame?" exploded wiggly price. "i can imagine nothing more dramatic
than sarbella being the guilty man--beautiful vamp, handsome, talented
young foreigner, related to nobility, a suicide, a brother's vendetta,
an unexpected meeting, arranged by fate, at the home of a friend who is
a popular novelist, and then--revenge!

"good lord, i hope you don't call a yarn like that tame! scoggins, my
city editor, will weep with joy if it pans out that way--and probably
give me a raise in salary, although it's his burning desire to fire me.
but i'm making the guess that the cigarette butt that we've picked up
out of the rug didn't belong to victor sarbella." he paused, looking
about the room again. "electric lights are so tricky to the eyes;
it's so easy to overlook something, some little thing that might be
tremendously important. it still lacks some time of being daylight, and
i'm anxious to scoot over to the jail and check up on this cigarette
clew--make sure whether or not it's sarbella's. are you going to remain
here for a little while, doctor?"

doctor bushnell glanced at his watch.

"yes," he answered; "at least until the undertaker arrives--probably
later. it's my official duty to remain, i suppose."

"your official duty?"

"as it happens, i am a deputy coroner."

wiggly showed his surprise. "you hadn't mentioned that; i hardly think
that even the constable realized it. of course you understand, doctor,
that, in a case like this, your authority exceeds that of any other
official. you are the commanding officer, so to speak."

doctor bushnell nodded. "in a way my position is somewhat embarrassing.
i have been the gilmore family physician for a good many years."

"i was wondering if i should be able to get inside the house again,"
said the reporter; "but, if you are the----"

"deputy coroner," corrected the physician. "doctor whitestone, the
coroner, is vacationing at saranac lake."

"anyhow, doctor, you are in charge, and all i need is your permission."

"probably it can be arranged," doctor bushnell said after a moment
of hesitation. "of course it will be rather difficult to admit one
reporter and bar the others, and there will be a regiment of them
swooping down on us; but you have rendered valuable assistance that
makes it very hard for me to refuse you. you will let me know, just as
soon as you have clinched the matter, whether the cigarette butt was
dropped by sarbella." he was taking the door key from his pocket and
was starting to leave the room.

"certainly," answered wiggly, moving to follow. "i came out from the
office in a taxi, and it's waiting downstairs. i shall come back
immediately after i have----" his voice trailed off, as he squinted at
the floor, where the chaise longue with its tragic burden cast a shadow
over the rug. swiftly he bent forward and picked up something.

doctor bushnell stared; it was nothing more startling than a hairpin,
and he was rather impatient that the newspaper man should subject it to
such an apparently interesting scrutiny.

"as i said," murmured wiggly, "artificial light is tricky. either one
of us should have noticed this before."

"it's nothing but a common, ordinary hairpin," grunted the physician;
"there's nothing in that--probably fell out of her hair."

price's forehead was wrinkled into a frown, and his ears were wiggling
again.

"it dropped from some one's hair," he muttered. "her hair? i wonder if
it did?"

"don't be ridiculous," snapped doctor bushnell.

"look at it!" the other commanded tersely. "what color is that hairpin?"

"black, of course," the doctor said impatiently.

"exactly--black! the dead woman's hair is blond. step over to her
dressing table, and perhaps you'll be puzzled, too. see, she uses
bronze hairpins, doctor. any woman with hair the color of hers, would.
a black hairpin! i wonder if this is a clew, a real clew?"

"rot!" retorted the physician. "any one might have dropped it; the
maid----"

"where is the maid?"

"bates said that she went to yonkers."

"and has the maid black hair?"

doctor bushnell considered for a moment, trying to remember. "dark
hair," he nodded; "perhaps not black. i couldn't say as to the
identical shade."

"the other mrs. gilmore?"

"quite gray."

"and the other--what is her name?"

the doctor frowned indignantly. "such a suspicion is too ridiculous,
too absurd!" he protested. yet with a vaguely uneasy feeling he
remembered joan sheridan's strange behavior, her anguished protest of
victor sarbella's innocence--and joan's hair was black, jet black!




                             chapter xvii

                           kirklan protests


hint of the physician's disturbed thoughts must have shown in his
face, for wiggly price gave him a keen, curious look, which seemed
to increase the former's discomfiture; he dallied nervously with the
fraternal charm attached to his watch chain.

"what color did you say, doctor?" pressed the newspaper man.

"it's ridiculous, absurd!" bushnell repeated explosively. "what if
joan's hair is dark? confound it, you make me downright angry, casting
an insinuation like that, just because of an inconsequential thing like
a hairpin."

wiggly gave a faint smile which was grim rather than humorous.

"i haven't insinuated anything, doctor; just asked a question, that's
all. oh, i admit there's nothing conclusive about a hairpin, and
yet--well, there was the hitchcock case that i mentioned, solved by a
black mourning pin."

"for murder there's got to be a motive," argued doctor bushnell; "no
one besides sarbella had a motive. i don't care what you find, i'd
never believe that any one except sarbella----"

the door was flung open with a startling violence, and kirklan gilmore
lunged into the room, hair disheveled, eyes wide and staring.

"what--what does this mean?" he cried hoarsely. "bates tells me that
the constable has arrested sarbella. is that true? come, answer me,
what does it mean?"

under his breath the doctor cursed the butler for adding this to the
man's nervous strain.

"i thought i gave you a sleeping tablet, kirklan. bates should not have
excited you by----"

"certainly he should have," gilmore broke in. "i've a right to know
what's going on in my own house. bates was perfectly right; but what
does it mean? bates says that sarbella was taken away--handcuffed. it's
true, isn't it?"

doctor bushnell nodded. "yes, kirklan, it's true; sarbella is
being--ah--detained, pending--well, at least pending further
investigation of your wife's murder. certain things developed which
made it advisable and necessary."

"great lord!" whispered gilmore, his shaking fingers raking back a
tangled shock of hair that fell across his forehead. "you mean--you
mean that sarbella has been arrested for--for that?" his other hand
went out, pointing to the couch.

"try and calm yourself, kirklan," soothed the physician. "i hadn't
intended that you should know this until you had pulled yourself
together somewhat. i knew that it would be a tremendous shock for you
to know that your friend, a guest in your home----"

"why," broke in the novelist, "was sarbella arrested?"

doctor bushnell hesitated over the answer, and wiggly price drew back
to one side, making himself as inconspicuous as possible.

"i demand to know," insisted gilmore, and the doctor saw that there
could be no further evasion.

"as i told you downstairs, kirklan," said bushnell, "we have
established beyond all question that it was murder. since she was
killed, some one had to kill her."

"but why sarbella?" the author pressed impatiently.

"obviously," went on the doctor, "an effort has been made to make it
appear suicide, but the effort failed; such efforts usually do. it's
hard to destroy evidence, next to the impossible. there were but five
persons in the house; you and bates downstairs, your stepmother, joan
and sarbella upstairs. taking the list into consideration it was only
natural that suspicion should turn to sarbella. and then----"

"but that's not proof, doctor--that's only suspicion," broke in
gilmore. "if you had no evidence, i don't see how you dared----"

"we had a little more than that," said doctor bushnell with obvious
reluctance, realizing that circumstances had made it unavoidable that
kirklan should know the terrible truth about helen's past life. "you
see, kirklan, we discovered that sarbella had a motive."

"a motive?" gilmore muttered dully. "what do you mean by that? what
reason could he have had? out with it! why do you torture me with this
suspense?"

doctor bushnell stepped forward and put a hand on the other's shoulder.

"heaven knows that i wish i could spare you this, kirklan, but it's
bound to come out at the trial and in the newspapers. you were not
aware, i suppose, that there was a previous relationship between----"
he had phrased it clumsily and gilmore started back with a shudder, a
look of anguished horror on his face.

"you mean that sarbella and my wife were----he lied to me--he lied to
me--gave me his word of honor that he had never seen her before. i knew
there was something wrong; i saw her face when she met him; i knew----"

"no you misunderstand me, kirklan. there was nothing like that. perhaps
you did not know that sarbella had a brother, a younger brother named
andrea, who----"

"who shot himself," finished gilmore. "yes, i'd heard of it; that
happened before i knew victor. but what has that got to do with this?"

"young sarbella shot himself because of a woman," went on doctor
bushnell. "because a woman, a very beautiful woman whom he loved
madly, had misled him about herself. she lied to him, tricked him, and
then--the woman's husband came to him and told him the truth."

kirklan gilmore stared dully; he seemed not to grasp the inference of
it all. the room was tensely quiet.

"i--i don't understand," he muttered thickly, "what that has to do with
sarbella and my wife."

"andrea sarbella," the doctor went on gently, "was the idol of his
mother and his brother. shock of the tragedy cost the mother's life,
and victor, it seems, took an oath that he would avenge himself on the
woman responsible for his double bereavement."

the dawning light of comprehension showed in gilmore's horror-stricken
eyes; a cry arose in his throat, as he staggered back into a chair and
buried his head within his hands.

"you mean," he choked, "that the woman was--was--my wife!"

"yes, kirklan, your wife was that woman. now you can understand why
sarbella has been placed under arrest."

again the room was silent, silent except for the choking sob which came
from the man huddled low in the chair. after a moment he staggered to
his feet and flung his arms wildly.

"it's a lie!" he shouted. "it's a lie! i don't believe it; i'll never
believe it. why, if what you say is true, she----"

"calm yourself, kirklan. sarbella has admitted what i have told you. we
might have never known the truth except that this young man recognized
her and put us on the right track."

gilmore, for the first time, seemed aware of wiggly price's presence.

"who are you?" he demanded hoarsely. "what do you mean by coming here
with these lies--about my wife? answer me--who are you?"

"my name is price, and i am a newspaper man."

gilmore wheeled accusingly upon the doctor. "who let him in?" he
shouted. "didn't i tell you----"

"easy, kirklan, easy now. i can't answer as to how price got into the
house, but i'll say it's a lucky thing for us that he did. except for
him we might still be beating our heads against a stone wall. when
you've calmed down you'll thank him instead of berating him. it may be
that he is the agent who will bring your wife's murderer to justice.
no matter what the woman did, a murder has been done; sarbella had no
right to take vengeance into his own hands."

the novelist dropped limply back into the chair, his muscles twitching,
as he stared at the sheet-covered body.

"sarbella?" he muttered thickly. "what--what does sarbella say?"

"naturally he denies it," answered the doctor. "we hope to find proof.
we must find proof; i doubt if he could be convicted on the purely
circumstantial evidence that we have so far. unless we can establish
his ownership of the automatic pistol, we will have to find something
else. if he thought the gun could be traced he surely would not have
left it behind."

gilmore lifted his head slowly.

"then there is no proof--only--only suspicion?" he paused for a moment
and then added: "i can't believe it! i can't believe that sarbella
killed her. and she--she was--that kind of a woman!"

doctor bushnell touched his shoulder. "try not to grieve, kirklan," he
urged quietly. "you were in love with the woman you thought her to be,
and she did not exist. she wasn't worth a good man's grief. we do not
even know--in fact, i doubt--if her marriage was legal."

"i can't believe that sarbella did it," repeated gilmore dully.
"she--she must have killed herself to escape the truth."

"did you happen to notice the brand of cigarettes that sarbella
smokes?" asked wiggly price.

gilmore's resentment against the newspaper man seemed to have vanished;
he displayed no curiosity over this apparently idle question, only
shook his head absently, like a man in a daze.

"and your wife," pressed wiggly, "i don't suppose that she used a
cigarette now and then?"

again gilmore shook his head, almost stupidly and without verbal
response, his hands dangling inertly across the arms of the chair.

"sarbella didn't do it," he muttered again, as if talking to
himself; "she did it to escape the truth. nothing will ever convince
me--nothing!"

around the edges of the drawn curtain was creeping the light of a
graying dawn. price moved toward the door.

"i'm going down to the village," he said in an undertone to the doctor;
"i'll come back when i've talked with sarbella about his brand of
cigarettes. remember my hunch and the black hairpin."

with that he hurried down the stairs and to the still waiting taxicab,
with its driver napping behind the wheel.




                             chapter xviii

                       two brands of cigarettes


the ardmore jail was located in the basement of borough hall, and,
since it was but a place of temporary detention until prisoners could
be removed to the county seat, it consisted of a single cell, a narrow
steel cage tucked away in one corner adjoining the furnace room. it was
here that victor sarbella, who had ceased his protests and had lapsed
into a stony silence, that took no cognizance of constable griggs'
persistent and exasperating questioning, had been lodged.

wiggly price found borough hall locked, and the place was in darkness.
griggs had decided to let the prisoner "cool his heels" for a while,
and he had gone home to freshen himself with a nap before continuing
the cross-examination. the village was still soundly asleep, and
wiggly, thinking that the constable must return shortly, made himself
as comfortable as possible in the cab.

time dragged past, and the reporter considered the greenacres tragedy
and its various angles. a great little rider of hunches was wiggly,
and, in the face of the obvious, he was riding the hunch that sarbella
hadn't shot helen gilmore. and the black hairpin, small a thing as it
was, occupied a conspicuous corner of his thoughts. the broken vase he
thought of only casually. the half-burned cigarette butt he admitted
might have some importance, but he much doubted that it had belonged
to sarbella. as he had told doctor bushnell, he couldn't conceive a
murderer, smoking a cigarette, would walk in on his victim. it just
wasn't reasonable.

the east was bright with the dawn of a brilliant day; the sun mounted
higher, and still ham griggs had not returned. wiggly glanced at his
watch with a growl of impatience; he knew that it wouldn't be long
until other news hounds would be keen on the scent of the big story.

"confound that fellow!" he muttered. "where's he gone to? more than
likely he considers the case solved and has gone home to tell his folks
what a great detective he is!"

from far up the deserted street just one sound broke the stillness,
a particularly cheerful, but tuneless, whistle which, as it came
nearer, brought into view an elephantine youth who approached with a
flat-footed shuffle, his shoes flapping noisily, as if they might be
trying to mark time to their owner's musical efforts. the village fat
boy, drawing closer, left off whistling and turned to song, singing in
a shrill treble, "yes, we have no bananas. we have no bananas to-day."

wiggly stepped from the cab to intercept him, and for no reason at all,
unless it were taken for granted that it was outward evidence of an
otherwise unexpressed mirth, wiggly's ears twitched.

"say, son," wiggly said briskly, "do you know where constable griggs
lives?"

for the moment master frederick throgmorton, as the local juvenile
heavyweight was named, was totally bereft of speech, completely
hypnotized by the amazing gymnastics of jimmy price's ears.

"huh?" he finally gulped. "whatcha--whatcha say?"

"i said: do you know where constable griggs lives?"

"sure--sure thing," gasped fatty frederick. "right--right down this
street--third block, second house from the corner. say, mister, tell a
feller somethin'--how did you learn to do it?"

wiggly flushed, as he always did when reminded of his refractory
appendages, and he dived swiftly back into the cab, as he gave the
chauffeur further directions. the taxi shot forward with a jerk. less
than a minute later they had negotiated the three blocks, and the new
york newspaper man was on the sidewalk and at the picket gate of the
griggs cottage.

etta, the constable's daughter, was ambitious, but her ambition was
centered upon becoming a playwright and did not, as a rule, extend to
early rising. but this morning she was up, fully dressed, and, at
the moment of wiggly price's ring, pressing her father for further
details of the greenacres murder. for once in her life she was actually
taking some pride in the fact that her parent was a constable. and ham
griggs willingly sacrificed his intended "forty winks" that he might
elaborate, none too modestly, on the part he had played; after all, it
was something to be a hero to the critical and exacting etta.

"i wouldn't be a lot surprised," he was saying, "that the reporter
feller will be wantin' my pitcher to put in the paper. there ain't no
use for me to deny, etty, that i done a purty slick piece of work. i
knowed the minute i clapped eyes on the eyetalian that he was the one
that done it. wouldn't be surprised but what i'd better scoot down to
jess burnside's pitcher gallery an' have some new pitchers struck; i
ain't set for a pitcher since----" he was interrupted by the ringing of
the doorbell. father and daughter had been so absorbed that they had
not heard the arrival of the taxi.

"i'll answer it, fawther," said etta, and for once ham griggs did not
correct the affectation which ordinarily so annoyed him. they had been
sitting in the kitchen, and etta had put on a pot of coffee which,
entirely unnoticed, had boiled over. ham tilted back in a chair,
uniform coat thrown open, snapping his suspenders smartly against his
chest.

etta frisked through the brief hallway to the front of the cottage.
as she opened the door, the upper portion of which was glass, with a
frosted design alleged to be artistic, she faced wiggly price, who
neglected the polite formality of removing his hat.

"constable griggs live here?"

"he does," admitted etta, one hand resting upon her practically hipless
waist, chin slightly tilted. "who shall i tell fawther is calling,
please?"

"price, of _the morning star_."

"o--oh," gasped etta, flustered. "come--come right in; i'll tell him."

but there was no need to tell him. ham griggs, the intervening doors
being open, had heard him and came striding out from the kitchen,
morally certain that his prediction was well founded, and that the
reporter had come for a photograph.

"come right on in, son," he boomed hospitably. "etty's just fixin' me
up a cup of java, an' i guess she can scare up a flock of eggs. guess
you ain't had no breakfast, huh? come right on into the kitchen an'
make yourself to home."

"fawther!" cried etta in embarrassed indignation. "ain't you--haven't
you forgotten your manners? in the kitchen? why the very idea! i'll set
the table in the dining room, and----"

"the kitchen for mine! don't bother, miss griggs. i'm in pretty much
of a hurry, but i can't turn down a cup of coffee after being up all
night."

"sure," the constable nodded complacently and then added: "guess
nothin' new turned up out at greenacres, huh? i nailed the right man,
all right; not a bad piece of work for a hick constable, if i do
say so myself." with a laugh he led the way into the kitchen, while
the mortified etta bit her lip in chagrin; but there was no choice
in accepting the situation. she recalled a line from her "social
etiquette" which told her, "when embarrassed by an unexpected caller,
the hostess should at once accept the situation in good grace and
make her guest feel welcome." but a guest in the kitchen! her little
reference book was mute as to that.

"i want to see sarbella just as quickly as i can," said wiggly, sitting
down and hitching his chair close to the table. he sniffed avidly. "ah,
that coffee does smell good!"

"sure," agreed ham griggs. "but whatcha want to see him about? what's
happened?"

"nothing's happened--exactly," wiggly answered cautiously, knowing
that the constable would in all probability resent any intimation of
sarbella's possible innocence. even a seasoned detective, once he has
made up his mind, does not relish the idea of being shown that he had
been wrong. in griggs' case, it would be a hard blow to his exuberant
vanity. "but, as you may realize, our evidence against the man is so
far purely circumstantial."

"oh, don't you worry about that," the constable said complacently;
"he'll come through with a confession, after he's had a good taste of
jail. stubborn as a mule he is so far, but he'll break down; they all
do."

"isn't it thrilling!" broke in etta, pouring coffee. "it's what you
call a big story, isn't it?"

wiggly gave a smiling nod. "it's about the best murder story i've ever
worked on."

etta beamed. "it was i who called up your editor and told him about
it," she announced.

"the thunder you did!" grunted ham griggs.

"if it's a scoop," promised wiggly; "i'll tell the city editor to have
the business office mail you a fat little check for the tip."

"oh, no! i didn't do it for any mercenary reasons. but, if the editor
wants to say something nice about my play----"

"eh--your play?"

"i expect it to be produced this fall. it's nearly finished; i have
promised to let a new york producer stage it."

"yes, i see," murmured wiggly gravely. he had the good sense not to
indulge in a smile, but his ears moved faintly. "and i'll certainly
speak to the dramatic critic about it--i certainly will." under his
breath he added: "lord, what the play bug does to people!"

etta was so excited by what she considered the total success of her
plan to establish a cordial personal relationship with the press that
she tipped a cup, spilling hot coffee over the back of her father's
hand.

"the murder at greenacres has given me the inspiration for another
play," she said. "it shall be a mystery play; they're so popular in new
york."

"a good mystery is about the most interesting thing in the world,"
declared wiggly, dropping a spoonful of sugar and stirring vigorously.

"and the gilmore tragedy--fawther has just finished telling me all
about it--isn't it dramatic?"

"it certainly is, miss griggs," agreed the reporter, wishing the girl
were in halifax.

"and to think," she rushed on, "that kirklan gilmore's new wife was
such an awful woman. so pretty, too; i saw her only the other day. you
know it was such a surprise when he married her. mrs. huggins--she's
a seamstress and used to sew for the gilmores--thought it was certain
that he would marry joan; such a sweet girl, joan."

wiggly's wandering thoughts suddenly became centered upon what the
gushing etta was saying.

"joan?" he murmured.

"young mr. gilmore's stepsister, you know. didn't you see her? such a
sweet girl! oh, i suppose some people would consider it unusual for a
man to marry his stepsister, but mrs. huggins thought it would turn out
that way. she's got sharp eyes, mrs. huggins has, and she said that
joan was simply in love with mr. gilmore; she used to help him so much
with his work, i understand. and then, while she was away in europe, he
married the other one. it was such a terrible surprise to everybody.
and mrs. huggins said----" her gossip broke off into a gasp, as she
stared at the reporter's ears which were now wiggling almost violently.

so joan was in love with her stepbrother; she had dark hair; and he
had found a black hairpin on the floor beside the slain woman's body!
this certainly was food for thought--not only food, but a feast! the
greenacres story gave promise of being a live mystery.

and there was the cigarette butt; the husband did not smoke cigarettes;
therefore it could not be explained by his dropping it there, and, if
it wasn't sarbella's----there was another angle.

during etta's moment of speechlessness, wiggly debated these matters
swiftly, as he gulped down his coffee, and constable griggs embraced
the opportunity to get back into the conversation.

"whatcha say you wanted to see sarbella about?" he demanded.

"as i said," answered wiggly; "there's no proof against him except
that he might be considered to have a motive, and that he also had an
opportunity to commit the crime. juries don't send men to the death
chair on that sort of evidence. of course, if he makes a confession
or we can trace the murder gun to him, that automatically solves our
difficulty; but sarbella is probably shrewd enough to realize what a
weak case you've got against him; if he does realize that, and if he is
guilty, he'll have sense enough to keep his mouth shut."

"whatcha hittin' at?" growled ham griggs.

"after you left greenacres, doctor bushnell and i looked around a
little, and we found a half-burned cigarette mashed down into the
rug of the room where the woman was killed. since gilmore doesn't
smoke----"

"sarbella smokes 'em," broke in the constable. "sure he does; purty
near one right after the other. regular cigarette fiend, the feller is.
that clinches the case on him, huh? is that what you're drivin' at?"

"if he smokes the same sort of cigarette as the one doctor bushnell
found on the rug, i'd say it was pretty much a clincher. it would be
evidence that he had been in the room."

"of course it's his cigarette!" exclaimed ham griggs, lumbering swiftly
to his feet. "i'd bet a hundred dollars on it. come on, son, we'll get
right down to the jail and prove it."

"why, fawther!" came etta's protest. "won't you let mr. price wait
until i have cooked the eggs? i was going to put them on the fire this
minute."

"speaking for mr. price," said wiggly, "the coffee is sufficient.
thanks just the same." he pushed back his chair and moved to follow the
constable.

"like as not when we face 'im with this," suggested griggs, "he'll
break down an' make a clean breast of it."

"oh, mr. price," called etta, "you won't forget to--to speak to the
dramatic critic about my play?"

wiggly promised, without committing himself as to just how he would
speak of it; there are some things, from a diplomatic standpoint, best
left unsaid.

the constable clumped briskly out of the house with the reporter
following. as they got into the taxi, ham griggs wondered if he were
not to be asked for a photograph with which to adorn the first page of
_the star_; already he had visualized the caption: "figures in gilmore
murder case--local officer who solved baffling mystery."

"if you want my pitcher for the paper," he suggested, "i'd better see
about havin' one struck. of course i ain't lookin' for no puff, but----"

"no use going to that expense," wiggly broke in; "we'll probably have
a staff photographer down during the day, and he can snap you on the
scene--examining the murder gun, you know, or something like that.
action pictures always more interesting, mr. constable," he ended
emphatically.

the brief trip was completed, and, as the machine again drew to a halt
in front of borough hall, the chauffeur entered a protest.

"say, boss," he exclaimed, "you don't expect a guy to sit at the wheel
forever, do you? a man's gotta sleep some time. guess you'd better pay
what the meter reads an' let me skim back to the big town."

wiggly paid the charge, which was twenty-seven dollars, gave a
three-dollar tip, and let him go. griggs entered the village's public
building and led the way down into the basement, where sarbella was
lodged. at the sound of their footsteps, ringing on the concrete floor,
the prisoner left off his nervous pacing of the cell's narrow confines
and came to the steel door of the cage. his attitude was weary,
dejected.

"mebbe you're ready to speak up, huh?" grunted ham griggs, facing him
from the other side of the bars.

"i have nothing to add," victor sarbella answered; "you already have
the only statement i care to make," he paused briefly and then added,
"for the present."

"silence ain't goin' to do you no good, for i aim to keep you right
where you are until you get ready to start talkin'," blustered the
constable. "we know you killed her; we've dug up some more evidence on
you--little matter of a cigarette that you dropped on the floor of that
room out to greenacres."

"cigarette?" muttered sarbella.

"may i have your cigarette case for a moment, mr. sarbella?" requested
wiggly.

the prisoner hesitated, gave the newspaper man a wary glance, and,
evidently realizing that they would take it away from him by force,
if he refused, slid his hand into his pocket, producing a silver case
inlaid with gold stripes. he shrugged his shoulders.

"i don't know what it's all about, but you're welcome; please do not
destroy the smokes. i've only two left."

wiggly price took the elaborate case, which sarbella passed through
the bars, and snapped it open. one glance was sufficient to verify
his logical doubts that the butt of the cheap cigarette which doctor
bushnell had discovered on the floor of the tragedy chamber had not
been the artist's. the two cigarettes before him were of an expensive
imported brand, straw-tipped and monogrammed with the man's initials.

the constable was looking over his shoulder, as wiggly extracted from
his vest pocket the flattened bit of evidence upon which both doctor
bushnell and ham griggs had expressed so much faith. he unfolded the
strip of paper that enwrapped it.

"they are not the same," he announced. "i didn't expect them to be.
the question now is--to whom did this belong? it looks very much like
another man--a man with cheap tastes in tobacco--was in that room last
night!"

victor sarbella pressed his body tensely against the bars, but not so
much as a syllable passed his lips. perhaps there was a look of relief
in his face.




                              chapter xix

                          enter sergeant tish


the constable and wiggly had left the basement, and griggs was almost
apoplectic with anger. he glared at the reporter with indignant disgust
and, as they entered the room used for the sessions of the borough
council, flopped down in a chair.

"now if you ain't made a fine mess of things! an' i give you credit for
havin' some sense! i might have got a confession outta him except for
your meddlin'. dog-gone you, anyhow! he'll think now that he's got a
chance to get out of it after you tellin' him that there must have been
another man in the room where the woman was killed."

"you've got to admit that it isn't sarbella's cigarette butt," defended
wiggly.

"if i'd have known you was goin' to pull a stunt like that, i'd never
have let you in to see him," raged ham griggs. "next time i'll have
better gumption than to let some fool reporter gum the cards for
me--you just bet i will."

"let's talk it over," wiggly urged placatingly. "let's use a little
simple logic. you admit, don't you, that this isn't sarbella's brand?"

"i don't admit nothin' of the sort," raged the constable. "chances are
that he dropped that cheap cigarette on the floor as a blind, tryin' to
leave a false scent to fool us."

wiggly shook his head. "that won't hold water, constable; you forget
that the murderer tried to make it appear suicide. and, as i tried
to impress on doctor bushnell, can you imagine a man set on murder
slipping in on his victim--smoking a cigarette?"

but ham griggs was in no mood for logic; he considered that he had
solved the case in arresting sarbella, and he wanted it to stay solved.
a re-opening of the facts led him into water over his head, and he
foresaw himself floundering helplessly beyond his depth.

"sarbella done it!" he shouted. "he killed the gilmore woman; he shot
her to get even. he shot her--with this gun." dramatically he dragged
forth the automatic pistol and waved it almost wildly. "and you've
gone and messed things up by lettin' him think he had a chance to get
off--darn your hide!"

the outburst was checked by the opening of the door which led into the
council room from the outside entrance, and there entered a short,
rotund man who wore his hat perched upon a bandaged head.

"where's the chief of police?" was the stranger's greeting.

"i'm the constable; it amounts to the same thing in ardmore," griggs
answered shortly, "but i ain't got no time to be bothered."

the corpulent little visitor moved back the edge of his coat, revealing
a badge of the new york police department.

"i'm detective sergeant tish--new york headquarters," he announced.
"your name griggs? you telephoned last night to the consolidated
taxicab company that you'd picked up an abandoned taxi on one of the
roads near ardmore?"

"yes, i did," grunted constable griggs, "but i ain't got no time to
bother about taxicabs now. i've got a murder on my hands."

"and i want to get my hands on a murderer," shot back sergeant john
henry tish. "that taxicab was stolen by----"

"don't give a hoot if it was!" shouted the constable. "the taxi's at
presley's garage. go get it, if you want it." he even forgot that he
had expected to receive a ten-dollar gift from the taxicab company.

sergeant tish, however, was not to be put off so easily. he projected
his short, portly form closer and occupied a chair beside the council
table, with the air of having something to say and being determined to
say it. he wasted no time.

"listen!" he commanded, wagging a pudgy forefinger with a forceful
gesture. "this is just as important to me as your case is to you. see
this?" he tapped his bandaged head. "the man i'm after did this to me,
and i'm going to get him. he knocked me cold--after i had the nippers
on him, see? i've got to get him.

"there may be some time when you'll want a favor from the new york
department. i want a little information--and a little courtesy. i'm no
windbag, and i won't keep you long."

"all right," grunted constable griggs. "what is it you want?"

"thanks," said sergeant tish. "first, where was it that you picked up
the machine?"

"out on the hudson road, 'bout half a mile from the village proper. i
called presley's garage an' had 'em drive the bus into their shop--and
that's all i can tell you about it, every blessed thing. i notified
the taxicab company."

"sure, i know that, and they flashed it right to headquarters.
there was a general alarm out for that taxi. so it was run into the
garage--under its own power, huh? that means haskins didn't ditch the
car because something went wrong with the engine. that may help some.
pretty swell folks live out on the hudson road, eh?"

griggs nodded. "most of 'em is rich," he agreed; "either rich or pretty
well fixed."

"sounds like it might be a warm trail," said sergeant tish, puffing out
his plump cheeks. "y'see--well, i'll have to give you the inside for
you to understand just what the situation is."

despite his first impatience, constable griggs became interested and
offered no protest.

"this bird i'm after," pursued tish, "is named don haskins. he's got
a record as long as an income-tax report. done a couple of short
stretches at sing sing, one out west--illinois--and has been in the
line-up down at headquarters and in the tombs. it would take an expert
accountant to keep the count. he used to be a slick crook, nifty
dresser and free spender, but he'd started slippin'. they all do.
clever--and hard-boiled."

here tish told the constable of his encounter with haskins.

"humph!" grunted constable griggs. "i see. and you're looking for your
man in these parts. sorry i ain't got the time to help, but----"

"just a minute," broke in sergeant tish. "i ain't quite through yet.
i'm right at the nub of it. eighth avenue annie, i guess, wanted to
cover up; anyhow, she runs out on the street yellin' bloody murder,
and a couple of uniform men rushes in to find me laid out, dead to the
world. but they brings me around, and then--oh, the grillin' we did
give old annie! we still got her locked up on a technical charge.

"before we got through with her, she comes through with a lot of dope
she didn't want to cough up. she hadda admit that haskins had paid her
big for his hide-out, and that he was gettin' ready to make the big
jump out of town; that he had a rich sister, a real swell, who made him
a visit and give him some dough. she was goin' to come back with more.

"now, that's the funny part of it; one of the boys down at headquarters
knows don haskins from the first time he went to elmira reformatory,
and he says that haskins did have a sister, but that she died eight or
nine years ago, and that she didn't fit the description which annie
give us. no matter about that, it's a cinch that some swell jane did
bring him the money. annie says she was the class.

"now, i was just wondering, gents--haskins leaves the swiped taxi out
on hudson road. the engine was o. k. that's proof that he left it there
because he wanted to, and not because the car stopped on him. where was
he headin' for? mebbe this swell who calls herself his sister lives
around here. now, you've got the whole works. i want somebody to help
me check up. see?"

ham griggs' cap was on the desk which belonged officially to the
borough council's president, his honor, mayor ripley. the cap
accidentally--not from any design--covered the automatic pistol which
had killed helen gilmore.

"as i told you," reiterated the constable, "i'm too busy this mornin'
to do anything for you. mebbe this afternoon, when i've got a
confession outta the prisoner i got downstairs, i'll have more time."
he reached for his uniform cap with a gesture of unshakable finality.

sergeant tish suddenly strained forward, his eyes bulging from out of
his plump round face, staring in open-mouthed and bewildered amazement
at the .44 on the desk.

"where did you get that gun?" he gasped, lunging out of the chair and
making a dive for it, getting his hands on it before griggs could stop
him. "where did you get my gun?"

ham griggs snorted derisively. "your gun? this here ain't your gun. it
belongs to that prisoner i got downstairs, and he shot a woman with it
last night. that's the murder case i'm workin' on."

tish's face was a strange study of emotion. "it's my gun!" he shouted.
"here's a little place chipped off one of the butt plates. sure it's my
gun. police department issue--you can tell that by the serial number.
sure, it's my gun--the one don haskins took off of me yesterday when he
knocked me out. and you say that a woman was shot with it--murdered?
you say that you took it off a prisoner, and that you've got him here?
you mean that you've got haskins locked up?"

the questions all jerked out with no pause, leaving him breathless,
his fat cheeks quivering. constable griggs was speechless, and wiggly
price's ears seemed determined to work themselves loose from his head.

"you're dead sure, sergeant, that it is your gun?" wiggly demanded
tensely. "it--it's very important that there should be no mistake about
this."

"don't you suppose i know my own gun?" snapped sergeant tish. "that's a
funny question, askin' a cop if he knows his own gun. i want haskins,
and i want him now."

constable griggs found things happening just a little too fast for
his slow wits. "i think you must be plumb crazy," he sputtered. "the
prisoner we got is named sarbella, an eyetalian feller; he's the one
that shot the woman with the gun. gimme it back."

"like thunder i'll give it back!" retorted sergeant tish.

"wait!" said wiggly. "i--i think i'm beginning to see some daylight.
haskins was a crook; some good-looking, swell-dressed woman brought him
money--posed as his rich sister. and the minute haskins got nabbed he
made tracks for ardmore. the cheap, ten-cents-a-pack cigarettes! just
the kind that haskins might be expected to smoke. haskins had sergeant
tish's gun--and that's the gun that killed her. don't you understand,
constable? we've made a bad mistake because we didn't know anything
about haskins. the murderer was haskins--the crook!"

and for the moment wiggly forgot all about the black hairpin.




                              chapter xx

                            a queer jumble


"haskins killed her!" wiggly price repeated excitedly. "we're on the
right trail; there doesn't seem to be any other explanation now.
haskins, the crook, shot her--with that gun."

while sergeant tish's identification of the murder gun, as the same
automatic pistol that don haskins had taken from his unconscious person
the previous afternoon, plus the certainty that haskins had deserted
the stolen taxicab at no great distance from greenacres, made it an
obvious theory that it might have been the crook who had murdered helen
gilmore, constable griggs sputtered protestingly. no man likes to admit
a mistake. for a moment he was too eternally flabbergasted for words;
this sudden development, the appearance of a new and unknown suspect,
floundered him helplessly in a sea of bewilderment.

possibility of victor sarbella's innocence endangered his triumph and
put the brakes on his ego, for, by that mental process which makes men
heroes in their own eyes, ham griggs had given himself a good deal more
credit than he was really entitled to. he forgot that it had been the
newspaper reporter's well-functioning memory, identifying the slain
woman as "the girl in the sarbella case," which had supplied the vital
link, the possible motive, and that, except for wiggly, there would
have been nothing upon which to have detained the artist.

not that wiggly price begrudged the constable feeding his vanity
fat; for wiggly was interested only in the story and concerned not
at all with whatever transitory fame might attach to the solver of
the mystery. give wiggly the story, and he was willing that constable
griggs should monopolize the credit.

sergeant john henry tish, realizing the importance that attached to
a positive identification of the automatic, examined it still more
carefully, reaffirming an already firm conviction that it was his. his
own excitement, too, matched that of the newspaper reporter.

"there's no doubt about it, gents," he declared. "it's my gun."

"huh!" grunted constable griggs, at last finding his tongue. "there
must be hundreds of guns like that, as much the same as peas in a pod."
his skepticism was, of course, backed by the wish that it be a mistake.
"mebbe it looks like your gun, mebbe it _has_ got a busted place on the
butt plates, but that don't prove----"

"a cop gets pretty well acquainted with a gun when he's packed it as
long as i've packed this one. there's a lot of little marks on it that
i recognize. i know it's my gat, and the serial number will prove it;
the department keeps a record of the numbers."

"it's a police regulation, all right," grunted wiggly price. "i ought
to have noticed that the first thing, but i didn't. i don't think
there's much chance of sergeant tish being mistaken, constable,
especially since the deserted taxi gives us proof that haskins did come
to ardmore last night."

"well, i ain't sayin' that it ain't, but at the same time i ain't
sayin' that it is," growled ham griggs. "nor am i goin' to admit that
sarbella didn't do the killin'; if he's so all-fired innocent, what
makes him keep his mouth shut so tight? if you think i'm goin' to turn
him loose just because somebody else _might_ have done it----"

"oh, i'm not trying to have you turn sarbella out of jail, constable,"
said wiggly. "i've no interest in him, personal or otherwise, beyond
seeing you put hands on the guilty man. detain him long as you like, so
far as i'm concerned."

"you betcha life i'll detain him long as i like!" blustered the
constable with a glare.

the rotund sergeant tish stood impatiently to his feet, shoving the
automatic into the empty holster, where it belonged.

"it sure looks like haskins is wanted now for two croaks instead of
one," he said gruffly. "suppose we make tracks for the place where the
woman was killed. just wasting time here."

"huh!" sneered constable griggs. "you don't think the feller you're
after will still be out to greenacres?"

"hardly," answered tish, "but we've got to start from there, anyhow.
haskins won't get far, i guess; there's already a general alarm out for
him. when they do nab him, i aim to have the goods on him--right."

"yes, we've got to go back to the gilmore place," agreed wiggly.
"we've got an entirely new angle to work on now."

ham griggs, still voicing a half-hearted protest, perhaps further
embittered that this new york detective was now upon the scene and
would probably try to take all the glory for himself, got grudgingly to
his feet. the three men left borough hall and went out to the street.

"confound it!" complained wiggly. "it must be a two-mile walk out there
to greenacres. why didn't i keep that taxi? and there's a real hurry,
too. where can we get a machine, constable?"

"presley's garage--if presley has opened up," ham griggs answered
sourly. "it's right around the corner."

"ain't necessary," said sergeant tish. "i came out in one of the
department's flivvers. got it parked just around the corner. it's only
a two-seater, but i guess we can manage it. the main thing is to get
out to that place quick as we can."

he led the way around the corner, where stood the roadster with "police
dept." painted upon the sides. the new york plain-clothes man got in
first, wedging his portly form in behind the steering wheel. constable
griggs, too, was a man of considerable bulk so that, even without
wiggly, all available seat room was occupied.

"the running board for mine," price said cheerfully and climbed up.
"let 'er go, sergeant."

tish started the engine, manipulated the foot pedals somewhat
awkwardly, and the little car started forward with a violence that
almost jerked the newspaper man to the ground; to save himself what
might have been a bad spill, one arm encircled ham griggs' neck, adding
to the latter's ill humor.

"i've always heard that you newspaper fellers was a pesky nuisance," he
muttered.

if wiggly was tempted to a retort, he gave no signs of it, merely
murmured an apology. there was a moment of silence, the constable
frowning deeply.

"we do know why sarbella would have killed her," he argued; "because
she vamped his brother and drove him to suicide, but why would this
haskins feller have done it? answer me that!"

"haskins is a hard guy," growled sergeant tish. "he wouldn't have
needed much motive, that bird. look at the way he clouted me over the
head with his handcuffs. like as not he had some sort of hold on her.
the murdered woman must of been the swell dame that haskins told eighth
avenue annie was his sister. see?"

"that ain't nothin' but guessin'," said constable griggs. "how are you
goin' to know if she was?"

"it may be guessing, but it's a darn' good guess," replied tish. "and,
far as that's concerned, we can have annie down to look at the body
and tell us whether or not it was the skirt who come to her place and
handed haskins some dough."

"but _why_ would haskins have killed her?" persisted ham griggs.

"well, i can't say positive as to that," answered tish, "but it would
be a pretty safe bet to figure it out. when i dropped in on him at old
annie's yesterday afternoon, he had to beat it in such a hurry that he
left his money under the mattress; perhaps he made tracks for this
greenacres place to get money. y'see, constable, she was going to bring
him some more jack wednesday--which is to-day--but i spoiled that.
since she couldn't come to him with the dough, he come to her. like
as not she was a little slow in coming across with the money, and he
croaked her."

"robbery, huh?" demanded ham griggs. "ain't that what you're drivin'
at?"

sergeant tish admitted that this was his tentative theory regarding the
murder at greenacres. the constable's grim face broke into a triumphant
smile, for he had led the new york detective into a deliberate trap.

"that ain't no good," he said with a grunt of satisfaction. "there
wasn't no robbery, mr. tish, for the gilmore woman was still wearin'
her jewelry when we found her dead. there must have been diamonds and
the like worth a good many hundred dollars. wouldn't he have taken the
jewelry? i ask you, wouldn't he?"

"well, i didn't know about that," answered sergeant tish, looking
not so crestfallen as griggs would have liked. "that seemed the most
plausible, and it's still not impossible, for haskins may have taken
money and have been too pressed for time--you haven't told me anything
about the facts, you know--to strip off the jewelry.

"anyhow what we _do_ know is that haskins did go to greenacres, and
that murder was done with the gun which was in his possession. if
haskins didn't kill her, then--how did the murderer get this automatic
pistol?"

constable griggs could not, of course, answer this question. wiggly
price, his feet planted firmly upon the running board of the little
car, and his fingers wrapped tightly about the rods supporting the top,
thought of something which added, to his mind, a fresh puzzler to the
whole mysterious business.

"there's something else, sergeant tish," he said, raising his voice so
that he might be heard above the sound of the motor and the rush of the
wind, as they hurried along. "if haskins killed her, why did he leave
the gun behind? he is a desperate man, already in open flight to escape
one charge of murder, and a man in a position such as his would want to
be armed. chances are that he would shoot it out before submitting to
capture. you say that haskins is a clever crook, and----"

"used to be," broke in tish. "been going down grade for some time.
booze--dope, too, likely as not."

"if he had any head on him at all," continued wiggly, "he would have
known that there was every chance in the world of that gun being
traced. there's something else. the gun was planted beside the dead
woman's body, an effort to give it every appearance of suicide. why
should haskins have done that?"

"i wish you'd give me the low-down on the case," urged sergeant tish.
"how do you expect me to get anywhere when you gimme the facts in jerks
and starts like that?"

constable griggs' face wore an elated expression as he listened to
wiggly. the reporter had declared his positive conviction of haskins'
guilt, and yet here he was shooting his own theory full of holes.

"so you've come back to my way of thinkin', eh?" he crowed. "come on
now and admit that i put the handcuffs on the right man. the eyetalian
done it. sure he did. i was right all the time."

the reporter's ears twitched meditatively.

"i'm not saying positively that haskins didn't kill the woman," he
answered. "but i do say that i can't understand why _he_ should have
been so anxious for it to appear suicide. it's very easy to understand
a possible link between this crook and gilmore's wife; she began life,
i think i told you, on the fringe of the underworld. oh, i admit that
i'm stumped--bad, but there must be a hidden something, somewhere, that
will put us right."

the detective sergeant's car was now at that point of the road where it
ran in front of the gilmore place.

"turn in here, sergeant tish," grunted the constable, as they neared
the driveway, and tish turned the wheel sharply. before they had quite
reached the house, tish stopped the machine.

"listen, gents," he said crisply, "let's get down to cases. it looks
to me as if haskins did the job here at this place, although, as our
reporter friend says, it _is_ queer that he left the gat behind. i want
to put my mitts on don haskins, whether he did the croak or not. and
you wanna get hold of the same bird, for, if he didn't do it, you want
him to tell you how this gun of mine got away from him.

"i want haskins, and you want haskins. circumstances puts us in
the same boat, and we ought to work together on this business." he
suppressed a wise grin, as he saw the look of displeasure on griggs'
face. "aw, don't worry, constable, i'm not going to butt in on your
territory. i'm not tryin' to steal your thunder."

sergeant tish paused for a reply.

"humph!" grunted ham griggs, not finding any valid excuse for refusing
this offer of coöperation.

"about all i know to date," pursued sergeant tish, "is that a woman
was bumped off with my gun, the one that haskins lifted from me, when
he handed me a knock-out at eighth avenue annie's, that the pistol was
left beside the body to make it look like suicide, and that you've
gathered in a guy named sarbella. if i'm goin' to help you any, i've
got to have the low-down. see?"

"yes, constable, we'd better tell him," said wiggly price, as griggs
remained silent. "if you've no objection, i'll give him a brief outline
of the facts."

"all right," agreed griggs, and price related to tish the facts in the
case.

sergeant tish listened thoughtfully to wiggly price's digest of the
tragedy, and, puffing out his plump cheeks to a balloonlike roundness,
nodded his head.

"it's sure a queer jumble, ain't it?" he grunted. "i don't blame you,
griggs, for thinkin' this sarbella fellow pulled the job, but how would
sarbella have got hold of the gun? no, it still looks like don haskins
to me. nobody else to be suspected, i suppose?"

wiggly thought of the black hairpin and that germ of suspicion which
etta griggs had planted in his mind by telling him of the suspected
one-sided romance between joan sheridan and her stepbrother. he
hesitated a moment and decided to keep this to himself, at least for
the present. let sarbella and don haskins, walking so unexpectedly into
the mystery, be eliminated before other complications were added. he
sidestepped this question by ignoring it entirely.

"surely," he said, "if bates had let haskins into the house, he would
have mentioned it."

"why don't we ask him whether he did or not?" grunted constable griggs,
for at this moment the butler had stepped out of the house into the
warming sunlight of the wide porch.




                              chapter xxi

                            a cry of terror


the three men left the little police car where it stood and walked the
remaining few yards to the house. bates saw their coming; as a matter
of fact, he had from within noticed their approach, and he had come out
to meet them. despite his evident weariness, he was patently eager for
any news. constable griggs, quickly forestalling any move that might
tend to crowd himself out of the major role, planted himself directly
in front of the butler, frowning sternly.

"when was the last time you saw the dead woman alive?" he demanded.

"immediately after dinner," answered bates; "she went directly
upstairs, and i did not see her again until--until she was dead."

"how long had you been in bed when it happened?"

"it was some time, sir; at least two hours, i am sure."

"what i'm hittin' at is this," explained griggs; "we've got some new
dope that may mean something, and then again it may not. did you let a
strange man into the house last night, or did you see any strange man
prowlin' about the place?"

"i--i don't believe i understand," murmured bates. "a strange man,
sir--prowling about the house?"

"that's what i said," grunted the constable, "and it's evident that you
didn't. was the doors locked?"

"absolutely," bates answered firmly. "i always lock up before turning
in for the night. i have been very careful about that, especially since
the burglar scare that we had last year."

"then the man couldn't have got into the house unless you had let him
in?" pressed griggs.

"the woman herself might have let him in, constable," interposed
sergeant tish. "if the butler had gone to bed she might have done it
without any one hearing her."

"huh!" retorted ham griggs, with a quicker flash of reasoning than
might have been expected. "how would she have known haskins was about,
unless he rung the doorbell, or called her on the phone, or something
like that? until you, sergeant tish, trapped 'im in that place in new
york, he didn't know his own self that he was comin' to greenacres."

"i am positive that there was no ring of any sort, either doorbell or
telephone, until mr. gilmore got me up to let him in--just before the
shot," offered bates. "any sort of ringing would have awakened me. but
this strange man--i do not understand. who----"

"might as well tell you, i suppose," grunted the constable. "we've
found out that the murder gun most likely belongs to this man"--he
jerked his head toward tish--"who is a detective from new york. the gun
was taken away from him by a feller named haskins, who swiped a taxi in
new york to make his get-away, and that same taxi was found by myself
out on the road, 'bout one and a half or two miles from here. so----"

"then it isn't mr. sarbella's gun?" broke in bates with a gasp of
surprise.

"that don't mean i've turned sarbella out of jail, not by a whole lot,
it don't," growled ham griggs. "he might have got hold of the gun
somehow; he might----" but, being unable to supply any further theory
of sarbella's guilt, his voice stopped abruptly. there was a moment of
silence, broken by bates.

"did i tell you about the letter?" he asked in his thin voice. "no, i
think not. it was doctor bushnell that i told about the letter."

"what letter?" demanded griggs.

"the letter that came for mrs. gilmore on monday," supplied the butler.
"i considered it most peculiar at the time, a very dirty envelope,
addressed with a lead pencil. she seemed much upset over it, although
she tried to pass it off."

"it might have been from haskins at that," spoke up wiggly price,
and he turned to sergeant tish. "it was yesterday--tuesday--that you
cornered haskins in the place you call eighth avenue annie's. what day
was it that the swell-dressed woman called on the man at that place?"

"monday," answered tish.

"ah!" exclaimed the newspaper man triumphantly, and his ears wiggled a
bit. "it was monday that the murdered woman got this letter that bates
tells about. bates, did she go to new york on monday?"

"i don't think to new york, but she did drive somewhere in the
motor--out into the country, i believe she said."

"yes, so she said," nodded wiggly with meaning emphasis. "that doesn't
make it true that she didn't go to new york. any one accompany her on
this motor trip?"

"she went alone; she returned late in the afternoon."

"say!" exploded ham griggs with a glare. "one would think _you_ was the
officer in charge the way you're bustin' in with all these questions."

"just one question more, constable griggs," urged wiggly. "i'm not
trying to be officious. bates, let us suppose for a moment that this
man, don haskins, did get into the house in some way or another, would
he have had time to get down the stairs before you and mr. gilmore
rushed up--and then let himself out of the house, while you and mr.
gilmore were upstairs?"

bates debated this question for a moment and then shook his head
positively.

"he would not," he replied; "but he might have easily found a place
to conceal himself in one of the rooms upstairs. there is one bit of
detail that i may have forgotten to mention. when mr. gilmore and i
were about halfway up the stairway, i am positive that i heard a door
slam very loudly--very loudly, indeed."

"huh!" grunted the constable. "that don't mean anything much. it might
just as well have been sarbella rushin' back to his room after havin'
shot her." and then he indulged in another bit of reasoning which did
him credit. "if it was the gilmore woman who went to see haskins in
new york, we know she wasn't too afraid of him to go see him in that
cheap joint sergeant tish told us about. and yet she was afraid of the
one who come in on her last night--because she screamed. why did she
scream? i'll tell you why she screamed; it was because she knowed that
sarbella had come to kill her! just put that in your pipe and smoke it
a while."

"not a bad deduction," nodded sergeant tish, "but the thing that
puzzles all of us is--how did sarbella get the gun away from haskins?
we're just wastin' good time arguing back and forth. let's go upstairs
and see if we can't pick up something new."

"the--the body has been removed," the butler informed them. "the
undertaker left an hour since. doctor bushnell was very careful that
nothing else should be disturbed, and the room is locked. doctor
bushnell----"

"and took the key off with him, i suppose," growled constable griggs.

"doctor bushnell, as i started to say," went on bates, "is still here.
mr. gilmore seems to be in quite a bad way, and the doctor is looking
after him."

"we'll go on upstairs," declared griggs. "tell the doc that we want him
to come right on up and let us into that room."

wiggly price did not follow them immediately; he loitered downstairs
until bates had delivered the message to the doctor and had returned.
the butler, luckily for wiggly, had not been told the reporter's true
interest in the case, else he would have doubtless guarded his tongue
most carefully.

"it's a bad business, bates," said the newspaper man to begin the
conversation.

"a terrible business," agreed the butler. "you don't think that mr.
sarbella killed her?"

"you do?"

"what else could i believe, with all the queer happenings? but i hope
not--as much for mr. gilmore's sake as anything, sir; he seems to take
mr. sarbella's arrest almost as hard as the murder."

"she was a bad lot, your master's slain wife, bates."

"i am not surprised at that," murmured the servant. "i sensed that
she wasn't the right sort. i think we all realized that--except mr.
kirklan."

"of course he wouldn't; she was a remarkably beautiful woman, and he
was in love with her. quite a sudden marriage, i understand."

"very sudden; a surprise and a shock to all of us."

"it's much too bad, bates, that mr. gilmore did not marry a woman
of the right kind--miss joan, say." wiggly's tone was disarmingly
careless, and bates did not understand that information was being
sought.

"yes, it certainly is," agreed the butler earnestly, falling
straightway into the little trap. "we were all hoping that it would
turn out that way. all of us, except mr. kirklan, could see with
half an eye that miss joan was in love with him, even if she is his
stepsister; it cut her up terribly when she came home from europe and
found her here. not only here, sir, but in miss joan's own room."

"the room where the murder was committed?"

"exactly, sir; that was miss joan's old room--the one that she had
occupied since she was quite a small girl. when she came back i didn't
have the heart to tell her about the room. 'bates,' she says to me,
'take the bags up to my room.' and i didn't have the heart to tell
her--knowing how much store she put by it."

this information, verification of what etta griggs had told him, might
mean something or nothing, wiggly knew; probably nothing. it was just
that he had that avidity of the trained newspaper reporter for all
the facts, because experience had taught him it is often the smallest
detail which, in the light of other things, achieves prime importance.
and there was the black hairpin; he was thinking of that again.

that could not be overlooked.

at this moment doctor bushnell appeared from the room on the first
floor, where he had placed kirklan gilmore, and whose bedside he was
just leaving.

"gilmore is in a bad, nervous state," he imparted after a nod to the
reporter. "you saw him upstairs before you left for the village; he was
bad enough then, but i'm afraid of a complete collapse--one of those
high-strung, emotional chaps, you know. if his thoughts are allowed to
torture him, they might even drive him to insanity; he must be kept
quiet. poor devil! it's much too bad that a love like that should have
to be wasted on a woman like her. then, to make matters worse, to make
the shock double, the man whom he considered his friend----"

he paused, remembering the cigarette butt that wiggly had taken down to
the village.

"what did you discover?"

"that it was not victor sarbella's cigarette that had been dropped upon
the rug. more than that, doctor, we've got another suspect now."

"another suspect? what other suspect could there be?"

briefly wiggly price told the physician of sergeant tish's appearance
at borough hall, his identification of the murder gun, and the other
matters which turned the finger of suspicion so strongly toward don
haskins, the crook who had already been in flight from one murder
charge. this information left doctor bushnell almost speechless.

"it's astounding!" he gasped. "positively astounding! it--it does have
a plausible sound, for a fact."

"the thing that bothers us," wiggly told him, "is why haskins should
have been so careful to have it appear suicide. surely no one besides
helen gilmore knew that he was inside the house. obviously he came for
money--he had a hold of some kind on her; probably knew about her past
and was levying blackmail; but there's no evidence that he got any
money, and he didn't touch her jewelry."

"you can't spend jewelry without first pawning or selling it," the
doctor said shrewdly; "possibly he realized that it would be too
dangerous for him to risk appearing in a pawnshop. perhaps he did get
money."

"he wouldn't have had to kill her for that," countered wiggly. "if
he did know of her past, this knowledge alone was sufficient to
extort money. he wouldn't have had to kill her. but let's be getting
upstairs. griggs and sergeant tish are waiting for you to let them into
the murder room. now that we're working from a new angle, it's best to
go over the ground again, and we've daylight now."

the physician nodded and started for the stairs.

"the crook's guilt would be the most satisfactory solution," he said,
"but it did look bad for sarbella. is he still being detained?"

"yes. you can't blame griggs for holding him; the murder isn't solved
yet, and it won't be, to my notion, until a number of points are
cleared up," answered wiggly.

as they reached the second floor, ham griggs and sergeant tish were
waiting, the former with considerable impatience. doctor bushnell
unlocked the door of the murder chamber and threw it wide. the body of
helen gilmore, as the butler had informed them, had been removed, but
the chaise longue, its creton upholstering stained with dark splotches,
bore its mute testimony of the tragedy.

"here we are," grunted the constable, "but i dunno what you expect to
find more'n has already been found."

sergeant tish projected his rotund form to the center of the room,
glanced about briefly, and then went to the windows, raising the shades
to their full height so that all possible light would be admitted. at
the second window the ripped curtain dangled before him and drew his
attention.

"it would be my guess," he said, pointing to the curtain, "that this
means one of two things: either it was done in a struggle with the
murdered woman, or when the murderer beat it through the window." he
paused a moment and added: "still, it doesn't look as if he'd have
taken the time to shut the window behind him."

he peered through the glass to the roof of the porch, puffed out his
round cheeks, and quickly threw up the sash. there had been no rain in
weeks, and the porch shingles were covered with a coating of dust. this
film was broken where don haskins' body had wiggled upward from the
cornice in his careful approach to the window, and, in more places than
one, the imprint of the man's stockinged feet showed. at tish's grunt
of elation, constable griggs dashed forward, with doctor bushnell and
wiggly behind him.

"somebody either entered or left this room through the window!"
exclaimed tish. "there's his trail in the dust on the shingles."

"entered!" said the newspaper reporter, his ears twitching. "you can
see that those footprints--and the man was in his stockings--are all
turned this way. yes, he came in by the window, but he didn't leave by
the window. another check in sarbella's favor.

"the man must have torn the curtain here, as he came into the room."

constable griggs gulped, but said nothing. sergeant tish bent forward
and examined the pane of the raised sash. clear and distinct there were
the prints of a man's fingers--on the inside of the glass. these prints
were punctuated with downward streaks, as if the fingers had slipped,
but the whorls had not been obliterated; in fact they were clear and
distinct.

tish reached his pudgy fingers to the breast pocket of his coat and
drew forth a bertillon card which he had borrowed from headquarters,
and which bore, in addition to rogues' gallery photographs, full-face
and profile, of don haskins, the crook's finger prints.

he bobbled his head back and forth, getting the light at the best
possible angle, and then he compared the finger prints on the window
glass with those upon the card. he gave a grunt of satisfaction and
nodded his head in affirmation.

"yep, this clinches it, gents. these are haskins' finger prints on
the window. good thing i brought this card along, huh?" it is hard
for a man with a chubby face like tish's to look grim, but his voice
certainly was grim, as he added, "haskins is wanted now for two
murders. the job now is--find haskins."

wiggly price leaned closer, and he, too, observed that the finger
prints were on the inside of the pane.

"that means," he said, "that haskins came in the window and closed
it behind him. those smudges at the top of the prints show that his
fingers slipped a little on the glass, and that his pressure was
downward. and, had he been raising the window, the finger prints would
have been at the top of the sash rather than at the bottom."

"that's true," tish agreed absently, returning the bertillon card to
his pocket and turning away from the window. "haskins must have climbed
to the roof from the porch below. guess we'll find evidence of that,
too, on the porch pillars, although it's not particularly important how
he got up; the thing that counts is that he did, that the man was in
the house, in this very room."

ham griggs realized that this new evidence, the incontrovertible proof
of the finger prints, completely knocked the legs out from under
his persistent theory of sarbella's guilt, and for the moment he
surrendered to a stunned and bewildered helplessness.

doctor bushnell's eyes remained upon the windowpane, with an intent and
fascinated interest.

"most remarkable!" he murmured. "how much can be proven by such a small
thing as the touch of a man's finger! the one witness, i understand,
that cannot lie. but what is the next move?"

"find don haskins," tish answered promptly.

"and that's a big order," sighed wiggly price. "the man's probably
miles away from greenacres by now. however there's nothing like being
thorough, and, if constable griggs can get a posse together----"

"huh!" snorted the constable. "you don't think he'd still be hangin'
anywhere around ardmore?"

"that depends on whether he got hold of any money," replied sergeant
tish. "he was broke when he left new york, y'know." he took a step
across the room and bent forward, as his foot crunched down upon a
piece of the broken vase on the floor beside the table. he picked it up
and held it in his fingers.

"haskins probably lurched against the table and knocked it off," said
wiggly, explaining what it was. tish glanced with slight interest at
the shattered bit of porcelain and tossed it down. it did, of course,
seem too trivial a thing for any serious consideration.

"we've put in a pretty good quarter of an hour here," grunted tish,
"and i guess we've done about all----good lord! what was that?"

from out in the hallway there had come to the ears of the four men the
sound of a choking, terrified cry, a jarring, dull thud, a rending
crash of broken glass. and then--silence.




                             chapter xxii

                           what the cook saw


there is no drama greater than the drama of life. the actors are more
than often thrust into rôles that are not of their choosing, and they
respond to cues that they do not recognize as cues, blindly obeying the
director as he plunges them into unsought situations.

mrs. bogart, the gilmore cook, who came to greenacres each morning and
returned to her home on the outskirts of ardmore each evening, was in
the kitchen; and, although it was baking day, not so much as a cup of
flour had been sifted. she had arrived shortly after daybreak, to be
greeted with news of the murder, and immediately she gave herself over
to intermittent outbursts of weeping. not that mrs. bogart, wide of
hips, ample of bosom and stolid of countenance, with straight, black
hair brushed severely back from her low and usually damp forehead,
had any great feeling of bereavement; but, for all of her phlegmatic
aspect, the cook was given to strong emotions. at the funeral of a
comparative stranger, for instance, it was the sound of her sobs which
arose above the muffled grief of the immediate family.

so mrs. bogart, except for brewing a bit of breakfast tea and toasting
some slices of bread--badly burned, at that--neglected her kitchen
work and gave way to her emotional nature. from bates she had learned
that the undertaker had arrived, and that "the new mrs. gilmore" had
been, as she phrased it, "laid out" in one of the spare bedrooms on the
second floor.

now, mrs. bogart, her attendance at funerals amounting to an obsession,
had gazed into the face of death innumerable times, but she had never
known the thrill of looking into the features of one who had been
murdered. people about ardmore were in the habit of dying prosaically
in their beds. this was an opportunity that might never come to her
again; and well-to-do folks, she had observed, frequently had their
funerals conducted privately, turning back the pryingly curious.

for some time mrs. bogart, whose place was strictly the kitchen, and
who had no other household duties, had been trying to think up an
excuse to visit the second floor, considering that this might offer her
an opportunity of viewing the dead woman. not possessing a particularly
agile mind, it took her some little time to arrive at this bit of
pretense, and she wouldn't have thought of it then except for some
empty fruit jars. and, while the jars might have better gone to the
basement, mrs. bogart craftily decided to carry them upstairs to the
third floor and into the seldom-used storeroom.

"goodness knows," she murmured, "i've been threatenin' for days upon
days to get 'em out of the kitchen."

straightway she mounted to a chair, took the fruit jars from the
shelf where they had been temporarily placed, used a dish cloth in
improvising a sling which would carry the full ten of them, and
started for the third floor. at some time or another there had been
a back stairs to the gilmore house, but this had been closed off in
making some modernizing alterations, so that mrs. bogart perforce
had to wend her way to the reception hall and up the wide front
stairway--hoping that bates would not see her and order her back to her
own domain.

bates, however, did not appear to interrupt her little pilgrimage of
morbid curiosity. she reached the second floor and, having to pass the
room wherein helen gilmore had been shot to death, paused for a moment
outside the narrowly open door, as she sought in vain to get anything
like a good look inside. and, while she could not see much, her ears
certainly got her a thrill, for it was at this moment that sergeant
tish had said: "yep, this clinches it, gents. these are haskins' finger
prints on the window. good thing i brought this card along, huh?
haskins is wanted now for two murders. the job now is--find haskins."

mrs. bogart's eyes bulged, and the empty fruit jars came perilously
near crashing to the floor. two murders! what did they mean? who else
had been murdered, and who was haskins? up to the moment of her last
talk with bates about the tragedy all suspicion had been leveled at
sarbella.

she tarried a moment, but there was nothing of the conversation on the
other side of the door to enlighten her; not wishing to run the risk of
being caught at eavesdropping, she moved on down the hall toward the
stairs, the top of the house, and the seldom-used storeroom.

the entrance to the third floor stairway was inclosed, and it was
reached by means of a door. mrs. bogart's hand went out to the knob;
her strong fingers closed about it with a muscular grip, and then a
startled gasp sounded on her lips, and a chill swept over her body.
the door had yielded a bare inch when she felt a retarding pressure,
holding it shut against her. some one was on the other side!

"mebbe--mebbe it's just stuck a little," she muttered in a gulping
whisper. "mebbe i imagined it." she braced her body, took a fresh and
determined grip on the knob, and tried it again. under exertion of
this strong pull the door, still in the grasp of that opposing, unseen
force, came toward her a bare inch or so, revealing to her staring
eyes, indistinct in the shadows of the inclosed stairs, a bleary,
unshaven face--a face hideously haggard, terrifying.

mrs. bogart staggered back with a choking, frightened cry upon her
lips; the fruit jars crashed to the floor, with a thud and the sound of
splintering glass, and the woman herself toppled over in a dead faint.
from the side of her face there gushed a stream of blood, where the
ragged edge of a broken jar had slashed the flesh. after the woman's
cry, the four men in the room up the hall stood staring at each other
for a brief moment.

"what's happened now?" gasped wiggly price, and constable griggs was
too utterly stupefied to make a sound.

"it sounds like a woman's scream," said doctor bushnell, looking no
less dazed than the rest.

sergeant tish was the first to leap into motion, projecting his pudgy
body out into the hall with the other three at his heels. at the sight
of the prostrate mrs. bogart, surrounded by broken and unbroken fruit
jars, with the blood still streaming from her face, the new york
detective stopped dead in his tracks.

"what's this?" he shouted. "who is this woman, and what's happened to
her?"

constable griggs edged forward and made a number of queer sounds before
he finally found voice.

"it--it's mrs. bogart--she that does the cookin' for the gilmores!" he
gulped. "she's all bloody. do--do you reckon that she's been murdered,
too?"

doctor bushnell brushed past and knelt quickly to the floor at the side
of the unconscious woman.

"she's not dead!" exclaimed wiggly price, noting the rapid rise and
fall of mrs. bogart's bosom.

"nor badly hurt, i think," said the physician, as he made a rapid
examination. "the blood here is from a superficial wound; she's been
cut by this broken glass. i wonder what _has_ happened to her?" he
jerked his head toward the newspaper man. "get my medicine kit, price,"
he commanded. "you'll find it downstairs; i left it on the table in the
library."

wiggly dashed down the stairs in instant response. yes, what had
happened to this woman whom griggs identified as the gilmore cook? was
this another angle to complicate the greenacres tangle?

passing through the hall into the library he heard a familiar
voice; it was "tip" gregory, a star reporter for a rival new york
newspaper, _the transcript_, pleading with the butler for admittance
and information, and bates was sternly refusing him either. wouldn't
gregory have gnashed his teeth in baffled rage if he had known that
wiggly price had things so sweetly to himself!

but the situation was too tense for wasting any time or thoughts upon
what was, after all, only an accidental triumph. he had the silly etta
griggs to thank for being here, on the inside of a big story, instead
of spending the morning canvassing the other papers for a job. in the
library was doctor bushnell's medicine kit; he grabbed the handle of
the little bag, wheeled and raced up the stairway again.

mrs. bogart was stirring, a moan passed her lips, but she had not
returned to consciousness.

"is she badly hurt, doctor?" wiggly asked, as he placed the kit upon
the floor.

"no, this cut would not cause unconsciousness. she must either have
fainted and fallen, or fainted because she fell. sometimes sudden and
profuse bleeding causes----"

the physician's words broke off at the sound of a stifled cry coming
from the turn of the hall, where the corridor led off to the wing of
the house. joan sheridan, alarmed by mrs. bogart's scream of fright,
had hurriedly left her room to investigate. her face told of a
sleepless, harrowed night, and now her eyes were wide and startled with
this threat of fresh terror.

"oh," she whispered, "it's mrs. bogart. in heaven's name what--what has
happened now?"

"that's what we are not exactly certain of, miss joan," answered doctor
bushnell, as he cut a dressing for the wound in the cook's face. "she
must have fallen. it is nothing serious; do not let it agitate you."

wiggly price had looked up quickly at the name of "joan," for this was
the first time that he had seen her, the stepsister who was so much in
love with kirklan gilmore. she was not aware of his scrutiny, so he had
ample opportunity to study her closely. his experience at reporting had
given him a sort of instinctive ability to gauge the human emotions,
and he had a feeling that there was more than horror in the girl's dark
eyes, and he read it with one brief word--fear.

this look of fear was not dissipated by the physician's assurance that
mrs. bogart's injury was superficial. it remained, a peculiar, almost
indescribable expression.

"your mother, miss joan, is resting quietly after the shock?" murmured
doctor bushnell, stanching the flow of blood in the unconscious woman's
cheek. "i will see her again presently."

"y-yes," joan sheridan said faintly; "mother is sleeping, and bates has
told me that mr. sarbella had been placed under arrest."

"that's true," nodded the doctor, "but it looks now that he will
be released very shortly. you were right when you were so sure
that sarbella was innocent, and i have a new respect for a woman's
intuition. i think you'd better go back to your room, please."

but the doctor's reassuring words seemed to have other than a soothing
effect upon joan; if possible, her face became a shade more pale.
certainly she gave a violent start, and that smoldering light of fear
leaped into a wild light of terror.

"you mean----" the shaking whisper that came from her lips was hardly
audible.

"please, joan, please!" exclaimed the doctor. "this is no time for
questions. i've a fainting woman on my hands, and a new suspect
entirely, a crook who got in by the window. the gun was his. no more
questions now."

a gasp that seemed to be at the same time amazement and relief came
from the girl; a look of bewilderment showed in her face. her hands,
so tightly clenched at her sides, relaxed; swiftly she turned and
disappeared around the bend in the hall.

wiggly price's ears twitched violently, for he, unlike the others--and
he, too, would have doubtless overlooked it but for the black hairpin
and the gossip etta griggs had given him--had observed her agitation
when told that sarbella had practically been removed as a suspect, and
her surprise and the relaxing tenseness when she learned of the other.

did this mean that she had knowledge of the crime, which, for reasons
of her own, she had kept to herself? with this wiggly linked still
another question: why had joan sheridan been so positive of victor
sarbella's innocence? for wiggly was of the opinion that "woman's
intuition" is something greatly exaggerated. the answer to the latter
question was in itself unimportant; for that matter, so had kirklan
gilmore been certain, to the point of vigorous protest, that the
artist had not fired the fatal shot.

wiggly made up his mind then and there that, while constable griggs was
searching for don haskins, he would be searching for the answer to joan
sheridan's puzzling behavior. he was certain there must be something
behind it, a vital something that would have an important bearing on
the crime.

doctor bushnell had completed dressing mrs. bogart's wound, having
delayed restoratives until this was done. now he was chafing her wrists
briskly, and the woman was showing signs of coming to her senses. with
startling suddenness her eyes flew open, and she sat erect; since
her first conscious thought was a return to the moment of her swoon,
a fresh cry of terror burst from her throat. it trailed off into a
gurgle, as she realized that she was not now alone.

"it's all right, mrs. bogart," the physician told her soothingly.
"you've had a nasty fall and cut yourself a little on those broken
jars; but it's nothing to worry about."

"that man!" cried mrs. bogart. "where--where did he go? it's heaven's
own blessing that he didn't murder me in my tracks. he was peering out
at me, and everything went dizzy black in front of me. i----"

"her head ain't right yet," grunted constable griggs. mrs. bogart,
letting her heavy fingers touch gingerly to her bandaged face, heard
the local officer's skeptical remark and bridled in indignation.

"i tell you i seen him!" she shrilled, pointing to the door which
closed off the third-floor stairs. "i seen him behind there. he
was holdin' the door shut on me. i was takin' these jars up to the
storeroom. i seen him--lookin' out at me through the crack. he's there
now, if he didn't run out. i tell you i seen him!"

all four of the men exchanged quick, startled, almost incredulous
glances. the same thought had leaped into all their minds. sergeant
tish, staring at the closed door, mechanically hitched his gun holster
within easier reach.

"do you think it's possible, men, that she did see a man, and that he
is----" began doctor bushnell.

"yes, it must be haskins!" cried wiggly. "haskins is still in the
house! we dashed out into the hall when she screamed. the man's had no
chance of escape."

sergeant tish pursed his lips, frowned, and shook his head. "i can't
believe it," he muttered. "i can't believe haskins would be such a
boob, hiding on the scene of the crime all these hours after the murder
has been committed. it's ridiculous."

constable ham griggs decided he had been in the background long
enough; events had been developing too fast for him to keep pace with
them, but here was a situation that he could cope with. it required
no deductions, only action. he took a decisive step forward, dragging
forth a somewhat ancient forty-five-caliber revolver, which he gave a
dramatic flourish.

"stand back!" he roared. "i'm the officer in charge here, and i'm goin'
up there to get my man!"




                             chapter xxiii

                            the trapped rat


with the breath wheezing noisily through his parted lips, which were
twisted back so that his clenched teeth were bared, don haskins leaned
tensely against the wall of the storeroom on the third floor of the
gilmore house. grim and desperate terror held him in its grip.

"they've got me--they've got me now!" he groaned. "caught like a rat in
a trap!"

half the night and all of the morning he had tried in vain to slip out
of the house--somewhere, anywhere. each effort had been frustrated
by the danger of discovery; at each attempt there had been voices
or footsteps in the hall, or floating warningly up the stairs. then
the coming of daylight had made the contemplated dash all the more
hazardous.

he had about made up his mind to wait for another coming of darkness,
when he had heard the arrival of a car, and, peering down from the
narrow dormer window, he had seen the arrival of detective sergeant
tish. the coming of tish naturally filled him with wild terror, for
that could mean but one thing--the new york detective had trailed him
to greenacres!

so, after several minutes of tortured indecision, he had crept down the
inclosed stairs, determined to make a break for it.

he could not put up a fight, for he had no weapon. while he had
crouched at the foot of the stairs, ears straining in an effort to
catch any sound of warning from the other side of the panel, mrs.
bogart had turned the knob, and haskins had seized it from the inside,
holding the door fast. then she had yanked it again, the eyes of the
two met through the narrow crack, and the woman had screamed.

for don haskins there had been but one choice, that was to hurry back
to the storeroom and wait. there was no bolt on the door, but he
barricaded it with a packing box filled with non-descript odds and
ends, such as people relegate to the garret. there was no means of
escape except the stairs; the dormer window mocked him with its deep,
unbroken drop downward. and no weapon; even the clutter of stuff that
half filled the storeroom offered him nothing that would serve as a
cudgel. so, helpless, defenseless, muttering curses between his locked
teeth, he waited. he wondered why it was so long, why the new york
copper did not come pounding up the stairs to get him. his eyes were
upon the door, his gaze intent upon the knob--watching for it to turn.
and then he got an idea!

the knob was held in place by a screw, and, for lack of a screw driver,
he went to the task with his finger nail. the screw was set fast, and
the nail tore down to the quick, but he did not notice the twinge of
pain, merely attacked the screw with the thumb nail of the other hand.
at last it turned, and the heavy metal knob was free.

haskins, that his shoes might make no alarming sound upon the bare
boards of the storeroom, was in his stockings. hastily he tore one of
his socks free from his foot, dropped the doorknob into it and he had
a deadly slung shot that he could swing with telling effect. not much
of a weapon, perhaps, but vastly better than no weapon at all. he put
on both shoes, the one over a bare foot, and again waited with tense,
twitching nervousness.

it must have been another five minutes--to haskins the minutes dragged
into the length of hours--before he heard a voice raised to a bellow
and the tramp of heavy feet upon the stairs. he flattened his body even
closer to the wall, at a point where he would be behind the door when
it opened, as he took a tighter grip about the weighted sock.

there may have been some doubts as to constable griggs' nimbleness of
mind, but there could be no doubt as to his personal courage, as, yards
ahead of sergeant tish, he dashed, two and three steps at a time, to
the third floor.

"come on outta there an' surrender!" roared ham griggs. "dead or alive,
haskins--that goes for you!"

but don haskins did not come out to surrender. he made not the
slightest sound. griggs again shouted, but still there was no response,
and he began to share tish's doubts of the wanted man being in the
house. perhaps mrs. bogart's story had been purely a figment of the
imagination.

without, however, relaxing the vigilant position of his gun, he reached
forward and tried the door. it moved back a little, and he met the
obstruction of the barricading packing box. the constable applied the
pressure of his shoulder, and his free hand cautiously cocked the
hammer of the revolver. the door was forced back another few inches.

the barred door, of course, was proof that the storeroom was occupied;
he paused a moment to peer through the narrow opening. no signs of
haskins.

"he's here," he yelled down the stairs to tish, who was looking up from
the bottom. "he's got the door blocked. i'm goin' in, and i'm goin' in
a-shootin'." again his body battered against the door.

don haskins, his mouth parted into a terrible grimace, swung back his
arm. as the constable's head and shoulders appeared at the edge of the
door, the sock, the metal knob stuffed wickedly in the toe, described a
swift arc and caught griggs a heavy blow on the skull.

with a grunt he pitched forward to the floor in a senseless heap; the
convulsion of his body pulled the trigger of the revolver, and its
roaring, angry voice thundered through the upper part of the house. the
gun slid across the boards and bumped against the leg of the discarded
couch.

haskins dropped his improvised weapon and leaped for the gun; his body
had scarcely straightened when sergeant tish came pounding and panting
up the steps, drawn automatic in his hand. as haskins whirled, he again
faced this nemesis who had trapped him at eighth avenue annie's. no
word was spoken; both knew it was one or the other.

haskins fired first, but only by the difference of a split second;
the two shots rang out almost as one. sergeant tish's shoulder became
suddenly numb, a searing numbness, as hot lead bored the flesh. his arm
dropped limply helpless to his side, and a sickening nausea paled the
chubby roundness of his cheeks.

the other man reeled on his feet and steadied himself against the wall.
a gasping gurgle, that trailed off into a curse, burst through his
hideously parted lips, and his left hand, pressing to his waist, became
red with a trickle of crimson.

but haskins did not fire again; there was no need. sergeant tish's
fingers had lost all their strength, and the automatic clumped to the
floor. he could offer no resistance when haskins stumbled forward,
cleared the body of the unconscious constable, and went plunging down
the stairs. in the doorway at the foot of the steps wiggly price and
doctor bushnell were staring upward. haskins lifted the revolver
menacingly.

"get outta my way!" he gritted. "i'll kill the first man that tries to
stop me."

it would have been a foolhardy thing to have opposed the flight of this
armed, desperate man, wanted for murder, trying to beat the electric
chair. doctor bushnell, clutching wiggly price's arm, made haste to get
out of haskins' path. mrs. bogart screamed shrilly and dashed wildly
for the first door. she hurled herself into the room and braced her
body against the panel.

haskins, as he reached the second floor, was reeling like a drunken
man. his left hand, still clutching his body near the top of his
trousers was hot and sticky with his own blood. he reached the top
of the second stairway which led down to the first floor--and what?
even in his desperately chaotic state of mind, he knew that the odds
were against him. but anything was better than the chair, and it was
that--or this. he felt his strength swiftly ebbing from his body,
slipping away from him through that hot, burning hole in his abdomen.

downstairs, bates, the butler, had heard the double shot and for a
moment was incapable of movement. it was only with supreme effort
that he got his frail old legs in motion and propelled himself toward
the stairs. halfway up he faced haskins, who held weavingly to the
bannister rail.

"out--out of my way!" ordered haskins, but his voice was thick,
hoarsely unsteady. the revolver wabbled with the lurching of his body.
before bates, petrified with terror at the menace of the pointing gun,
could obey, the wounded man at the top of the stairs sagged forward and
went crashing down, sliding, bumping, clawing, and his body came to a
halt on the first landing at bates' feet. he had just enough strength
to lift himself weakly to his elbow.

"that dirty dick--got me--good!" he muttered. "i--i hope i
croaked--him. curse the cops! the cops and the skirts--to hell with
both of 'em!" he coughed chokingly. "i'm dyin'," he screeched. "i'm
bleedin' to death--inside."

his distorted mouth was flecked with red.




                             chapter xxiv

                       haskins keeps his secret


stunned and sick from the paralyzing impact of haskins' bullet,
sergeant tish did not realize that his own shot had found an even more
vital mark; he had failed to see the trickle of crimson that welled
from between the wanted man's fingers, as the latter had pressed his
hand hard against his body. in a daze the new york detective only
realized that the desperate fugitive was escaping from him a second
time, and that his flight must be stopped. as his thoughts cleared
a little, it occurred to him that haskins might try to leave in the
police car out in front of the house, but he would have a hard job of
that, for the plain-clothes man had the key to the ignition switch in
his pocket.

the local constable still lay in a huddled, grotesque heap on
the floor, and he had not moved. despite his own haste to pursue
haskins--his injury would not stop that--tish leaned over ham griggs,
puzzled that there was no evidence of a terrible, lethal wound. he
had taken it for granted that haskins must have had another weapon in
addition to the one left beside the body of the murdered helen gilmore,
and that he had shot down griggs, as the latter had burst in upon him
in the attempted capture. all he could find was a purpling swelling at
the edge of griggs' temple; and then he saw the improvised weapon, the
strangest that had ever come to his notice--the sock weighted with the
doorknob.

"huh!" said sergeant tish, with a grunt that was more than half a
groan. he saw what had happened. "haskins beaned 'im with that thing,
handed him a knock-out, and then took his gun away from him." he bent
still a little lower and perceived that the constable's breathing was
reassuringly regular. "don't look like he was goin' to croak."

as don haskins collapsed and went crashing down the stairs, wiggly
price and doctor bushnell stood gaping at each other, both struggling
with indecision as to which direction they would turn as their first
move to follow this breathless race of happenings. what had happened
upstairs they did not know, only that to their ears had come the
ominous sound of three pistol shots, and that neither constable griggs
nor sergeant tish had come down.

"what's happened to the two officers?" cried doctor bushnell.
"perhaps----" before he could finish the sentence, tish appeared at the
head of the inclosed stairway, his right arm dangling limply, a trickle
of blood seeping down beneath the edge of his coat sleeve, twisting
into a fantastic crimson design about his wrist and the back of his
hand.

"what's happened up there?" shouted the physician. "heavens, man,
you're wounded! griggs----"

tish had retrieved the automatic and held it in his left hand rather
awkwardly, but determined to use it if he could.

"the constable is knocked cold," he said, as he came down the steps.
"you'd better look after him, doctor. haskins has----"

wiggly price had rushed to the head of the other stairs, from where
he could see don haskins sprawled upon the first landing, gasping for
breath and mopping the foam from his mouth with the back of his hand.
the revolver had slid several steps down and was safely out of the
man's reach.

"here he is, sergeant!" shouted the newspaper man. "he nicked you, but
you got him worse than that."

again doctor bushnell struggled with indecision. three men wounded!
which of them should have first call upon his professional services?
don haskins' choking wail, coming from down the front stairs, decided
him.

"i'm dyin'!" he croaked. "i say i'm dyin'." and with the next breath
he muttered a vicious curse upon "the cops." but, before the doctor
could move out of his tracks, joan sheridan had again come flying from
the east wing of the house and clutched his arm. at the moment of her
appearance she saw tish.

"those shots--what do they mean?" she panted. "what--what has happened
now?"

"we have caught the murderer," answered doctor bushnell, gently
pushing her away. "the crook who killed kirklan's wife was in hiding
on the third floor." another groan came from haskins. "there was some
shooting; the man's desperately wounded. i am going to see now. go back
to your room, joan; you've had enough horror."

but the girl crept to the top of the stairs after him and stared down
with a shudder.

"i--i can't understand!" she whispered. "they say that man killed her.
i--i can't understand!" she whispered. "they say that man killed her.
i can't understand!"

had wiggly price been privileged to hear those whispered words of
joan's it would have added fresh fuel to his smoldering suspicion that
she knew more about the death of helen gilmore than she was willing
to tell. the newspaper man had hurried down the stairs and, elbowing
the butler out of the way, bent over haskins. a moment later doctor
bushnell had joined him, tish close behind. the doctor shook his head
gravely, as he saw the bloodstained saliva about haskins' lips.

"internal hemorrhage," he murmured. "i don't think there's much chance
for him."

as if to verify this diagnosis, haskins gave a gasping cough, and the
crimson foam became a trickle.

"ain'tcha gonna call a priest?" he murmured. "i'm dyin', i tell
you--dyin'."

"keep him alive, doc, until i get a full confession out of him," urged
sergeant tish. "haskins, come through; make a clean breast of----"

"no questions for a moment," broke in the physician. "let him be quiet
until i see what can be done for him. no matter what he's done, he's
entitled to the best a doctor can give him. it's barely possible that
an immediate operation----"

don haskins made a half-sobbing, half-growling protest.

"nix on the--operation stuff. it wouldn't do me no good--anyhow; i tell
you that i'm bleedin' to death--inside of me."

doctor bushnell jerked his head toward wiggly.

"help me with him," he ordered. "we'll have to get him somewhere, so
that i can see what can be done for him." and to the butler: "bates, up
the stairs quick--get my bag. it's on the floor in the hall--near the
other stairs. and, bates, where can we take this man?"

"there are but two guest rooms, sir; one mr. sarbella occupied, and the
other--the body has been placed there."

"then it will have to be sarbella's room," declared the doctor. "help
me up with him, mr. price. careful, haskins; the more exertion the more
the bleeding and the slimmer your chances."

sergeant tish's bullet-punctured shoulder, now that the numbness of the
thudding impact was passing, throbbed with an excruciating agony, but
he clamped his teeth together, having no intention of making a demand
upon doctor bushnell's professional services until a statement was had
from the possibly dying prisoner. he could offer no assistance, but he
followed back up the stairs, as bushnell and the newspaper reporter
supported haskins to the second floor and along the hall to the guest
room which had been sarbella's.

joan sheridan tarried indecisively another moment or so and then
she returned to her own room, her mind in no way cleared of the
bewilderment. she longed for explanations, but knew this was no time to
ask questions.

in the guest room haskins was placed upon the bed where, as his first
act in an effort to save the mans' life, doctor bushnell quickly
prepared an internal astringent, a drug calculated to check the inward
bleeding. then he examined the wound with the aid of a probe; haskins'
slowing pulse warned the physician that life was ebbing, and that
there was no hope.

"the nearest hospital is fifteen miles away, and the trip would be
fatal," he said. "and i have never specialized in surgery. i have tried
to check the internal blood flow, but there is nothing else i can do.
all that i can suggest is to call doctor hollis, who is a surgeon. if
the man is still alive when hollis gets here----"

"it--it ain't no use," gasped don haskins. "i'm gonna croak, and i know
i'm gonna croak."

"yes, haskins, it looks that way," nodded doctor bushnell; "if you've
got any statement to make you'd better make it now. anyhow i'll
telephone doctor hollis and then look after ham griggs. unconscious,
didn't you say, sergeant tish? lord, the house has suddenly become a
hospital! what about your own injury?"

tish shook his head. "i can wait--until haskins has talked," he said.
"you'd better look after the constable first, anyhow. it may be worse
than it seemed to me."

don haskins was breathing heavily, his eyes closed, his hands clenched.
as the doctor left the room, tish leaned forward, but became dizzily
faint and had to seek the support of a chair.

"you might as well talk, haskins," he said. "what made you shoot
gilmore's wife?"

the prisoner's lips twisted. "you're gonna give me the rap for that?"
he muttered weakly. "tryin' to hang two croaks onto me--and i never did
either one of 'em." his eyes opened slowly. "dago mike--did he tell the
cops that i did for the watchman--that loft job in the bronx?"

tish nodded. "yes, that's what he told the inspector," he answered.

"it's a lie," said haskins, but without any great emotion of
indignation; perhaps, being so sure that he was dying, he did not
care, or it might have been that he did not have the strength left for
vehemence. still, again, it was possible that it sounded so flat and
colorless, this denial, because it lacked the ring of truth. "dago mike
done it. i knowed he'd squeal; he always was a dirty rat. i was a fool
to go into a job with that--that scum. yeah, dago mike was the one that
did the watchman."

tish winced with a fresh throb of pain from his shoulder. "why did you
shoot gilmore's wife?" he repeated.

haskins turned his head, let his mouth twist into a harsh smile, and,
lifting his hand slowly, wiped his lips with the back of his hand.
there was again a little blood.

"gilmore's wife?" he retorted in a hoarse whisper. "she was--my wife!"

wiggly price started forward with an exclamation of amazement, and his
ears danced with excitement.

"w-what?" he gasped. "y-your wife? you mean that? great heavens, tish,
i believe he's telling the truth!"

the new york detective gestured for silence with his uninjured arm.

"shut up!" he commanded tersely.

"yeah, that's--that's what she was--my wife," went on don haskins in a
whisper, which, as he continued to talk, was at times hardly audible.
"she done bigamy when she married--gilmore. she--she never got no
divorce--from me.

"i'm gonna talk, see. what i'm tellin' you is strictly on the level. i
know i'm goin'--fast; there ain't no use for me to--cover up. curse the
skirts! if it wasn't--for her----" his voice trailed off in a choking
excitement, his eyes closed momentarily, and the two eagerly listening
men were afraid that it was all over with him, but haskins looked at
them again.

"i--i guess she thought she'd shook me--after i busted up a mash she
had on a guy named sarbella; but i kept cases on her--got a line on her
when i come back from chi--parole from a long stretch at joliet.

"then i gets into that bronx job jam, and i needs dough--bad. and
quick. so i send for--for her, and she----" he had to stop again to
wipe his mouth free of that trickle of blood which oozed upward from
his punctured stomach.

"and she came to eighth avenue annie's," supplied tish. "she gave you
some money. we know that much; go on, haskins."

"she was comin' back--to-day--with a thousand iron men," proceeded the
prisoner's weakening whisper. "then annie tipped off the cops. curse
the old hag! i dunno why annie----"

"she did not," grunted sergeant tish; "i saw her buying some duds and
trailed her. annie didn't double cross you."

"when i lays you out--and beats it," went on haskins, "i--i guess
you know part of it, how i swipes a taxi an' blows out here?" tish
nodded. "i sneaks around the house an' spots--helen's window, does a
porch-climber stunt to the roof, gets into her room, an'----"

"and shot her--with my gun," prompted the detective. but, if haskins
was the murderer, he did not fall into this trap of suggestion.

"i'm givin' it to you--straight," his whisper went on. "i didn't croak
her; i--i grabbed her, and she--got the gat--outta my pocket, but
i didn't know that--then. we hears a door slam, an' we thinks it's
gilmore--in the--next room. she sneaks me into the hall and tells me to
hide--third floor. says she'll get me some dough and get me--away."

the man's words were so faint and came from his lips in such a jerky
tumble that both tish and wiggly price had to lean close in order to
hear the rest of his story.

"when i gets up there--third floor, i knows it was her--took--the gun.
i--i guess she was afraid i was gonna--use it--on her. she knowed she'd
done me dirt. curse her--she made a bum--outta me.

"i--i wants that gun, see! after a while i sneaks back down to--second
floor--to make her--gimme the gat. as i gets to--to the foot of the
stairs i hears a scream. it comes from--from her room. then--then
there's--a shot."

both tish and wiggly looked skeptical at this, but neither of them
spoke; both sensed that don haskins had something to add. they were
right; he had. after another moment of silence, haskins' lips moved
again.

"the--the door--was open; the--the light was burnin'--inside, an' i
seen--the one who did the job--comin' out--of the room."

sergeant tish snorted derisively.

"haskins," he flung out, "you're lying! are you going to face your
maker with that lie on your conscience? that stuff's the bunk. you
killed her, and you might as well come through."

"wait a minute, sergeant," whispered wiggly; "ask him whom he saw
coming out of the room. there's a chance that he may be telling us the
truth!"

tish hesitated a moment, stirred in his chair, winced with the pain of
the movement, and then accepted the suggestion.

"there's just one way that you can prove that you are giving us
straight goods, haskins," he said, "and that's to tell us who came out
of the room."

don haskins closed his eyes again, and a queer, crooked, mirthless
grimace caught up the corners of his mouth, a grimace all the more
horrible because a fresh trickle of crimson seeped across his lips
and trickled down his unshaven chin. whether he had begun his story
with the intention of ending it at this most unsatisfactory point, or
whether the abrupt termination was a matter of sudden decision, can
never be known.

"she--she was--no good," he told them in an almost inaudible whisper.
"she--she made a bum outta me when--when she gimme the go-by. she made
that sarbella kid do a dutch, and she handed gilmore--a mean wallop.
she got--what was comin' to her. if i wasn't gonna croak--i'd have
to talk to save--my own self; but i ain't gonna make no trouble--for
nobody--on account--killin' her. that's all you get--from me."

"he's lying!" gritted tish. "sure he's lying. he killed her."

but wiggly price was not so sure. if haskins, as it seemed, knew he was
dying, why should he lie? there was one possibility why he should; it
might have occurred to him that he still had a chance to cheat death,
and he had cunningly concocted this yarn out of the whole cloth.

thoughts and theories leaped through wiggly's mind. if haskins' story,
improbable as it sounded, were true, the greenacres mystery had been
returned to its first status, and suspicion returned even more strongly
to victor sarbella. guilt lay between the artist and joan sheridan.
again the newspaper man thought of the girl's agitation when told
that suspicion had turned away from sarbella, her relief and yet
bewilderment when she had heard that circumstances pointed to haskins,
the crook; and he thought, too, of the black hairpin.

"you're lying, haskins," tish said again; "but what gets me is that you
didn't make a break for it after the shooting."

the wounded man stirred slightly. "i--i tried--to make--my get-away,"
he whispered, "but there was two guys comin' up the front stairs, an' i
hadda dodge back--to--the attic."

"haskins," burst out wiggly, "the person you saw coming out of that
room--was it a man or a woman?"

but don haskins shook his head feebly. he made no other response.
a little later, while tish still plied insistent and exasperated
questions, the man's body twitched and relaxed; then a gush of crimson
poured from his mouth.

"he's dying!" cried wiggly and made a leap toward the door to summon
doctor bushnell.

it was too late. haskins' eyes had opened and were fixed glassily upon
the ceiling. he was dying with his last, stubborn silence unbroken; and
the gilmore tragedy was yet to be solved.




                              chapter xxv

                    the skepticism of sergeant tish


the doctor had found constable griggs' injury worse than he had
anticipated, for haskins had struck a vicious blow with the doorknob
wickedly concealed within the toe of his sock; there was a bad skull
fracture that threatened fatal results. with bates to help him, doctor
bushnell had placed ham griggs upon the discarded couch and had just
completed a painstaking examination, when wiggly price came pounding up
the third floor stairs to the storeroom.

"quick, doc!" panted the newspaper man. "haskins is dying; he's got
another hemorrhage--a worse one. i'm afraid he's a goner."

the doctor motioned to the butler.

"you stay here with the constable, bates," he ordered. "i'll be back in
a moment; we've got to get this man to the hospital. he's dangerously
hurt, price; a bad skull fracture." as he spoke, he was following the
reporter back down the stairs. "i'm not surprised about haskins. but
there was nothing more than i could do for him, and griggs needed me,
too."

"the other doctor, the surgeon, you telephoned for----"

"is operating at a hospital in new york this morning; i was unable to
reach him. but, for that matter, i do not believe any human agency
could have saved haskins. perhaps, after all, it's better this
way; circumstances are doing what the state would doubtless have
done--exacted his life in payment."

they had reached the door of the guest room. sergeant tish still sat in
his chair beside the bed; he turned slowly, painfully.

"you're too late," he said.

doctor bushnell stepped forward, was silent for moment; then he
inclined his head.

"yes," he agreed. "i'm too late, but it doesn't matter; even an
operation was a forlorn hope. i could not have kept him alive; nothing
could have done that, i think." he stared down at the dead man's
contorted features. "an evil face," he murmured. "an evil end for an
evil life. did he make a confession, sergeant?"

"no, confound his stubbornness!" growled sergeant tish. "he gave us a
wild kind of yarn that explained his connection with the gilmore woman,
his hold on her, and how he got into the house, but denied that he did
the shooting. of course he was lying."

doctor bushnell nodded. "he killed her--certainly," he agreed. "the way
he knocked out griggs and shot you is proof that he was a cold-blooded
killer. what was the hold that he had over the dead woman?"

"she was haskins' wife--his legal wife."

the physician gasped and, thinking of the beautiful helen gilmore,
stared down at the hideous face of the dead criminal, with a look of
amazement that bordered upon incredulity.

"what--the wife of that man? it seems absurd, absolutely preposterous!
i find it next to impossible to believe it. then, when she married
kirklan, she----"

"committed bigamy," finished sergeant tish with a jerk of his head that
sent another stab of pain through his wounded shoulder. "that's it,
doctor; and that is what gave him a hold on her--why he was able to
have her visit him at eighth avenue annie's day before yesterday, give
him money and agree to give him still more; that was why he fled to her
for protection and was hiding when i stumbled onto him. i guess that
part of it is true, all right.

"perhaps not so amazing as it would seem. haskins was not always the
bum he is now. they used to call him nifty don in his palmy days; he's
hit the skids since then. he blames her for slipping; she threw him
over, as i got it. i wish you'd take a look at this shoulder of mine,
doc; the wound is throbbing like a sixty-horse-power engine."

doctor bushnell murmured a hasty apology for neglecting him so long.

"i'll have a look at that right now, sergeant tish. three emergency
cases all at one time is a big order for a doctor. price, will you
get my kit from the third floor? i'm hoping there's enough gauze and
bandages to do."

"the constable come around all right?" asked tish, as the newspaper man
hurried from the room.

"a bad skull fracture, sergeant, where haskins struck him a terrific
blow on the side of the head. i'm taking him to the hospital just as
quickly as i've got you patched up a bit. you, too, if there is need."

"don't think it'll be necessary, doc. lord, what a wild morning it's
been!" he gritted his teeth, as the physician slipped down the coat
sleeve and began ripping away the shirt. "what's happened to gilmore?
strange that he didn't show up with all the racket."

"probably asleep under the influence of the opiate that i gave him
to relax his strain," answered doctor bushnell. "he's one of those
high-strung, emotional fellows, and i couldn't risk too much nervous
tension with him. he was on the verge of a collapse. poor devil! he's a
good sort; doesn't deserve what that woman has done to him."

wiggly returned with the doctor's kit, and bushnell began to work
swiftly; the wound in the detective's shoulder had bled but little. the
bullet, he found, had struck the collar bone at a deflecting angle,
plowing for a brief distance along the top of the clavicle, where it
was imbedded just beneath the skin.

"you're a lucky man, sergeant tish," grunted the doctor. "if that had
been a little lower there would have been the very devil to pay. the
worst danger is that the bone has been cracked, and i do not think it
has been. this treatment, of course, is only temporary; i'll look after
you again later."

it was the work of but a few minutes to make a shallow incision which
removed the bullet, cauterize the wound, and apply dressings.

"i shall take griggs to the hospital in my car," said bushnell, as he
finished. "the butler can go along with me. we'll be back within an
hour or so--just as soon as i can manage it. i suppose sarbella will
have to stay in jail until griggs recovers consciousness and releases
him."

wiggly broke a considerable silence.

"it's my notion," he said, "that sarbella had better stay right where
he is until--well, until the case has been cleared up completely."

the doctor stared in surprise. "what do you mean by that?" he
exclaimed. "not that there's any doubt but haskins killed the woman?"

"not the slightest doubt that haskins did it," tish declared in a
positive tone. "i don't take any stock in his story--that is, the part
of it in which he denied doing the shooting. i suppose the rest of it
is straight enough."

doctor bushnell looked reprovingly at the newspaper man. "i must say,"
he said severely, "that you are a most perverse young man. when the
weight of all the evidence was strictly against sarbella, you were
trying to prove his innocence. yet now, when the discovery and capture
of this desperate criminal--the legal husband of the dead woman--makes
it practically certain that haskins was the murderer, you suddenly
change front and----"

"perhaps it's because i've got more faith in the truth of haskins'
story than sergeant tish has," broke in wiggly price. "in my mind the
case against sarbella is stronger than ever--circumstantially. but,
with what we've got, i don't think for a minute that a jury would ever
convict him. haskins' account of things does explain how sarbella,
or"--he hesitated cautiously--"or some other person might have got
possession of the gun."

"or some other person!" exclaimed the doctor impatiently. "tut, price,
don't be such an utter ass. i've something more important to do than
listen to a new crop of empty theories. what other person, pray, have
you in mind?"

wiggly felt that any mention of joan sheridan would arouse the
physician's antagonism; moreover it would serve no purpose. so he chose
the wise course of answering the question only with a shrug of the
shoulders.

"the constable is a heavy man, and the butler old and rather feeble,"
he said, abruptly switching the subject; "perhaps i'd better help you
get him downstairs and into your car."

"yes; please," grunted doctor bushnell.

tish trailed along behind the two and waited on the second floor,
while the physician and wiggly went to the storeroom to carry down the
unconscious ham griggs.

"he hasn't moved a muscle since you left, doctor bushnell," reported
the butler. "except that i can see him breathing i'd think he was dead."

the doctor issued brief, terse instructions, and he and wiggly formed
a human packsaddle by grasping each other's wrists. in this way, their
heavy burden between them, they made their way down from the third
floor, while bates hurried off to get a supply of pillows for padding
the tonneau of the doctor's car.

"i was going to suggest that you come along," bushnell suggested; but
wiggly shook his head.

"no, i'd like to stay here," he answered. "bates will do as well as i
for your trip."

"oh, i see," the physician said shortly, "you want to gather some new
theories about the tragedy. you're making a fool of yourself, price;
the case, thank heaven, is solved."

"hope so, doctor, but that remains to be seen."

"certainly it's solved!" exclaimed bushnell with asperity. "as deputy
coroner i shall convene a jury and hold an inquest as quickly as
possible--this afternoon. i'll bring the district attorney back with me
when i return from the hospital. the verdict will be a mere matter of
formality."

"yes," agreed wiggly, "a mere matter of formality, unless we turn up
something new."

the butler came hurrying out of the house with the pillows; the
doctor took them from him and arranged them supportingly behind the
unconscious constable's shoulders.

"get your hat, bates," he instructed; "you'll have to go along."

three or four minutes later the physician's machine, bushnell at the
wheel and bates in the rear seat with the insensible griggs, rolled
down the white-graveled driveway, and wiggly returned to the house,
wondering a little what had happened to tip gregory, reporter for the
rival paper, _the transcript_. probably tip, rebuffed at greenacres,
had gone to the village in search of information.

sergeant tish had come down from the second floor and had established
himself in one of the library's roomy chairs, making himself as
comfortable as his twinging shoulder would permit. his roundish
face was still gray with the throbbing pain, but he endured it with
fortitude.

"well, young man," he grunted, "you've got a darn good story, and you
ought to be satisfied. seems to me that it's good enough to suit your
paper without your trying to add anything imaginative."

"meaning," replied wiggly, "that you'd have me quit thinking. nope, i
stick to my hunch that haskins' story was what he said it was--strictly
on the level."

"bunk!" snorted tish.

"let's talk it over, sergeant," wiggly urged earnestly as, hands
rammed deep into his pockets, he strode up and down the room, his ears
twitching slightly. "does it seem reasonable to you that haskins would
have left the automatic behind him after the shooting?"

"humph!" the new york detective grunted non-committally.

"that gun," went on the newspaper man, "was his one friend, the only
hope that he had if he were cornered. besides, leaving the gun behind
served no purpose--no purpose whatever. in fact, if he had the brains
to reason it out, he would have known that there was a chance--a
serious chance--of the automatic being identified as your gun. it's the
common thing to trace a gun by its serial number."

"he might have dropped the gun accidentally and didn't have a chance to
get his hands on it again."

"oh, i say, sergeant, that's too thin!" exclaimed wiggly. "it's taking
too much for granted to presume that the gun accidentally fell in a
position directly beneath the murdered woman's hand. no, that was done
with the deliberate intention of having her death appear suicide."

"it's a good point, and it's reasonable," admitted tish, "but it
doesn't prove anything. i got to admit it does seem a little queer that
haskins would have left the gun behind."

"and it hooks up with haskins' story about missing the gun, realizing
that the gilmore woman had lifted it out of his pocket, and his
determination to risk a trip downstairs again in an effort to get it
back."

"humph!" tish said again.

"when you identified the gun as yours--the one that haskins took away
from you when he knocked you out at eighth avenue annie's yesterday--it
did seem impossible that sarbella, or any one else, could have done the
shooting. but let us suppose that haskins' dying statement was true.
the gilmore woman had the gun; maybe she took it because she was afraid
of her legal husband."

"whatcha mean--'or any one else?'" growled tish. "you keep hinting
at something you haven't let me in on. if it wasn't haskins or
sarbella----aw, you talk like a fool!"

wiggly hesitated for a moment. "tish," he said slowly, "i don't know
that i'm exactly holding any aces, but i'm going to lay all my cards on
the table and let you have a look at 'em. we know why sarbella might
have killed the woman."

"motive ain't strong enough," broke in the detective with a shake of
the head. "his kid brother lost his head over her and killed himself;
that's all."

"ordinarily i'd agree with you, but when we think of sarbella's motive
we've got to think of a race that is credited with a passion for
personal vengeance. the latins are hot-blooded, and their blood does
not cool quickly like ours. they nurse a grudge for years.

"let us suppose that sarbella went to the gilmore woman's room, not
with the intention of killing her, but to tell her that, unless she
made a full confession to her husband, he would tell gilmore, himself.
the gun was there--the gun that she had taken away from haskins--and
the man's hatred for this bronze-haired vampire who caused the suicide
of his brother and the ultimate death of their mother, mastered him."

"suppose anything you darn please," grunted tish. "it's easy enough to
cook up stuff, but making it hold water is something else. yeah, i'll
say it is."

"but there's something else," persisted wiggly. "you've missed the
hidden undercurrent that i've sensed. i tell you, tish, there's
something beneath the surface of things in this house."

"meaning just what?" the detective asked skeptically.

"did you notice gilmore's stepsister--joan sheridan her name is--when
she came out into the hall after the cook fainted?"

tish eyed the newspaper man half curiously, half disgustedly.

"i saw her," he answered.

"yes, you saw her, but did you see the expressions of her face? did you
notice how excited she became----"

"say, i guess any woman would be excited, after what had happened, to
hear a woman screaming like that cook did, and her face all bloody on
top of it."

"when the doctor told her that sarbella had been removed from
suspicion, and that some one else had done the shooting," wiggly went
on, "well, i saw it, tish; and i saw, too, what a look of relief
came into her face when bushnell told her that it was haskins, the
crook. the human emotions seldom lie, tish, and, take it from me, that
sheridan girl knows a lot more about this thing than she is willing to
tell."

"rave on!" growled sergeant tish. "i'd given you credit for having a
balance wheel, but that's nut stuff you're pulling now."

"wait a minute," wiggly pressed on, not discouraged by the other's
derision. "maybe you remember that haskins refused to answer me when i
asked him if it was a man or a woman he saw coming out of the gilmore
woman's room after he heard the shot."

"i can answer it, even if haskins didn't; it was a man come out of the
room, and it was haskins himself. whatcha trying to do now--hang it
onto the sheridan girl? think it would make a better story for you,
huh? aw, forget it! why would she have done it?" the question came in a
triumphant tone.

"oh, i've got you an answer for that, tish," wiggly replied. "so you
demand a motive; all right, i'll furnish that, too. the strongest and
most unreasoning of motives, the most deadly--jealousy!"

"huh?"

"joan sheridan is in love with her stepbrother. i got that from the
constable's daughter this morning."

"a woman's gossip!" snorted tish. "i wouldn't go two cents on no kind
of talk like that."

"and verified it by the butler," wiggly added doggedly. "the
constable's daughter is a great little gabber, and i wouldn't take
her unsupported word; so i felt out bates, and he admitted that the
household had rather hoped for a match between gilmore and miss
sheridan. yes, she's in love with her stepbrother; used to help him
with his work and that sort of thing. the butler told me that it was
a great shock to miss sheridan when she returned home from europe and
found that he had married during her absence.

"there's another little point; it might not seem so much, but i can
imagine how it must have added to the blow. miss sheridan also returned
home to find this strange woman--gilmore's bride--had taken possession
of her own room, a room that she had occupied for years and had
formed a deep attachment for. i gather that a very strained situation
resulted; even the servants took a dislike to the new mrs. gilmore.

"man, i tell you there's something under the surface; i tell you that
we've only scratched the surface, so to speak, of the gilmore mystery.
if miss sheridan would talk, we might learn something interesting." he
tossed up his hands in a helpless gesture. "it would be silly to try
and quiz her until we've got something to face her with; that would
only spoil whatever chances we may have of getting to the bottom of it."

sergeant tish frowned and puffed out his plump cheeks; he was thinking
things over now; then he shook his head.

"don't take much stock in it," he declared.

"jealousy is a primitive passion," argued wiggly. "i'd consider it a
stronger motive than revenge. between sarbella and the girl----"

"no," tish corrected himself, "i don't take any stock in it at all.
haskins did the murder; haskins is dead, and the case is closed. don't
bother me with any more of this stuff."

"there's one more thing that i haven't told you," said the newspaper
man. "you remember the color of the murdered woman's hair?"

"sort of a dull gold, isn't it?" grunted tish, interested in spite of
himself. "what's the color of her hair got to do with it?"

"bronze is the right color, tish; naturally she uses bronze hairpins,
as i verified by a look at her dressing table. and yet on the floor
beside the chaise longue i found a black hairpin, and miss sheridan's
hair is dark."

sergeant tish puffed out his cheeks, looking up slowly. for a full
minute he debated this information before he stirred.

"women are always dropping hairpins outta their heads; might have
been a servant, or miss sheridan, for that matter, paying a perfectly
innocent visit to the room." yet the detective's tone was deliberate,
thoughtful.

"remember the hitchcock murder--solved by a black mourning pin?"

moving cautiously in an effort to keep any painful strain from his
shoulder muscles, tish stood to his feet.

"mind you," he warned, "i don't say that i think you're within a
hundred miles of being right, but it'll do no harm to go upstairs and
have another look around."

in the light of tish's previously derisive skepticism, wiggly felt that
he had achieved something of a victory.




                             chapter xxvi

                            bits of tallow


presently tish and wiggly price were once more within the room where
helen gilmore had met death, again seeking from the mute furnishings
some vital clew that previous examinations might have overlooked. the
newspaper man was all eagerness, but the interest of the detective had
already cooled. there was the window with haskins' finger prints; he
had the sort of mind that readily accepts the obvious, and his police
experience had taught him that, nine chances to ten, the obvious is the
true.

it was a little hard to think of this cheerful bed-chamber as a
place of dark deeds. the north windows looked out upon the wide and
shimmering bosom of the hudson; a sailboat clipped daintily over the
water, and in its wake the sunlight made the ripples scintillate like
diamonds. across the tappan zee the stern ruggedness of the new jersey
palisades was softened with a verdant touch and splash of summer
greenness.

"the answer to it all is here," said wiggly. "there must be something
more for us than just a woman's hairpin."

"sure," grunted tish; "my gun and haskins' finger prints on the glass."
he had returned even more positively to the conviction that he had been
right in the first place.

"ah, but what we're after now, tish, is a clew that will outweigh the
finger prints and the gun. there must be something more than that;
there's got to be."

"that stuff about there always being a clew is the bunk," said tish.
"i've seen dozens of cases where there wasn't a thing for us cops to go
on. but this is different. all the evidence points straight at haskins.
what else have you got? a hairpin and an imagination!"

wiggly was not discouraged; beginning at the side of the room, he began
to walk slowly, bent nearly double, his eyes searching, searching,
while tish watched him in a half-amused, half-contemptuous silence.
again the reporter came upon the shattered pieces of the broken vase
which lay on the rug near the little mahogany table, but he had
already rejected these fragments as things of no importance; proof, if
anything, that some one, probably the murderer, had struck against the
table, crashing the vase to the floor. perhaps it was to his discredit
as an investigator that it did not occur to him as strange that the
vase should have been broken into as many pieces.

near the table, however, he did find something that he had overlooked
until now; it was a bit of whitish substance which, as he picked it up
from where it had been crushed flat into the rug, was moderately soft
between his fingers. he frowned over it, puzzled.

"tallow!" he exclaimed. "the sort of tallow they make candles of."

"huh!" grunted tish.

"people seldom use tallow candles these days, except for those
decorative candlesticks." his gaze roved swiftly about the room.
"no candlestick in this room, either. this piece is too chunky to be
candle drip; besides, why should any one have been walking around with
a lighted candle last night? if the lights had been out of commission,
some one would surely have mentioned it. wouldn't you consider this
just a little queer, tish?"

"if you're asking me to speak my mind, i'd be more apt to say that
you're a little queer, always jumping at little things that don't
amount to anything. what if it is a piece of tallow? that don't prove
anything--any more than a hairpin does."

speculatively wiggly turned the find over in his hand; it was grained
with black specks. he looked to the floor again and, some three or four
feet away, saw another bit of it.

"no children in the house," he mused. "children might explain it; when
i was a kid i used to take a candle and mold it into odd sorts of
shapes--a juvenile attempt at sculpture--human heads, animals, and the
like. yes, tish, this is queer--darned queer!" completely baffled in
his effort to account for the presence of the tallow, he put it into
his pocket along with the black hairpin.

"something else to think about, anyhow," he told himself and continued
his literally inch-by-inch survey of the room. it was at the far end of
the chamber that, almost completely hidden in the thick nap of the rug,
he found another piece of the broken vase, this one little more than a
sliver, and still another bit of the tallow.

"tish!" he fairly shouted. "come here! here's a little mystery all in
itself."

"what now?"

wiggly exhibited the fragment of porcelain and pointed dramatically to
the spot on the rug where he had discovered it.

"we've been presuming all along, tish," he said almost breathlessly,
"that the vase was broken when some one bumped into the table. it's a
dozen feet from the table to this spot; it isn't reasonable to think
that one of the pieces could have shattered for such a distance. as a
matter of fact, tish, there's something that i've been a blockhead not
to think of before. this rug is pretty thick; it's only three feet from
the top of the table to the floor, and yet that vase is broken into a
hundred and one pieces. and here's a bit of it twelve feet away!"

"humph!" grunted tish.

"what do you make of it anyhow?"

"maybe the gilmore woman threw it at haskins," suggested the detective,
puffing out his cheeks and frowning; "maybe she saw what was coming,
picked up the vase, and flung it at his head--something like that, huh?"

"y-yes," wiggly admitted hesitatingly; "that might explain it being
broken into so many pieces, but that doesn't explain the tallow. i've
got a feeling that those are the two things that are going to add up to
four."

"oh, forget the tallow!" tish muttered peevishly. "what's a little
tallow got to do with a murder--or a smashed vase, for that matter? you
better stick to digging up news and let this sherlock business alone."

wiggly shook his head stubbornly.

"it's a puzzle, tish, but i'm going to stick until these peculiar
little things you scoff at are explained." he again took up his
search, but further results were nil. tish was growing impatient.

"i'm going back downstairs," he announced.

"wonder where this door leads to?" murmured the reporter, as he reached
for the knob. it did not yield to his touch, but the key was in the
lock; a moment later he was looking within kirklan gilmore's sleeping
chamber.

"ah!" he mused. "she had the door locked against her husband. wonder if
that means there was discord in the new love nest?"

sergeant tish snorted derisively. "next," he said with withering
sarcasm, "you'll be trying to hang it onto the husband--and him
downstairs when the shot was fired."

"oh, not at all," wiggly answered without resentment; "that was just
an aside." he entered the room, gave it a brief survey, and then,
satisfied that it had nothing to offer him, returned, closing the door
and relocking it behind him. "nothing in there that could interest us,
tish. the net result so far seems to be one black hairpin and a few
pieces of tallow candle--perhaps a broken vase. i'm not so sure but
that you've given a pretty logical explanation of the vase." he sighed
in discouragement. "not much to go on, eh? wish i could figure out the
tallow thing."

"forget it," advised tish.

"if we could only get miss sheridan to talk. wish i had the authority
to put her through a sprout of questions!"

tish tenderly massaged the wrist of his injured arm; the bandages
interfered with his circulation.

"well, you haven't got the authority; neither have i. and i wouldn't
waste my time quizzing her, if i had. so far as i'm concerned, the case
is solved. haskins did the killing. i've messed around here and let you
play at the detective business long enough; me for one of those comfy
chairs down in the library. guess i'll stick around for the inquest.
coming down?"

wiggly hesitated for a moment and then nodded. "yes, i suppose i might
as well," he agreed; "i think i've exhausted the possibilities here."

the two men went downstairs and into the library, tish to take what
comfort he could in one of the easy-chairs, and the newspaper man
to speculate with discouraging futility on the puzzle of the candle
tallow. he felt as if he had told the new york detective sergeant that
the next move was to question joan sheridan. while he had no authority
in the matter, he was several times on the verge of taking this course
into his own hands.

doctor bushnell, he felt very sure, would resent any hint that the
girl had a criminal knowledge of the murder; the physician would be
prejudiced in her favor and wave aside the suggestion indignantly.
it would be his natural inclination to consider haskins guilty and
brush aside any other theory. a cross-examination of miss sheridan,
in the doctor's hands, was liable to be a perfunctory and negligible
proceeding.

"well, young un, got it figured out yet?" grunted tish, breaking a
considerable silence.

"not yet," admitted wiggly, "but i haven't given it up. i'm still
struggling with it."

again silence.

"where's gilmore?" asked tish presently. "i haven't had eyes on the
man since i've been here. wasn't in his room when you opened that door,
huh?"

"the doctor put him to bed somewhere here on the ground floor--gave him
a shot of dope, i believe, to quiet him. i saw him last night; he was
pretty well cut up over it, naturally. he'll get another jolt between
the eyes when he's told that the woman wasn't legally married to him.
it's pretty tough on a chap, losing illusions of the woman you're in
love with."

"uh-huh," grunted tish. "a pretty woman sure can stir up a lot of hell
for a man--when she's the wrong sort."

wiggly turned in his chair, as there came to his ears the sound of a
step on the stairs outside the archway dividing the library from the
reception hall, the tap of a woman's high-heeled shoes.

"perhaps----" he murmured and leaped to his feet; he was thinking it
might be joan sheridan, and that he could manufacture some excuse to
get her in conversation. his hopeful guess was right; it was joan. she
came slowly down the stairs, her face white and drawn. as the newspaper
man, although she had no knowledge of his profession, appeared before
her, she paused.

"i am looking for doctor bushnell," she murmured; "i am anxious to
know----" her voice trailed off.

"doctor bushnell has taken the constable to the hospital," he
explained, "but, if there is anything i can do, i am at your service."
he stepped aside with a gesture that she was to come into the library
and, turning his head, gave tish an entreating look. now that the
opportunity had presented itself he decided to play a colossal game of
bluffing.

"miss sheridan, this is detective sergeant tish of the new york police
department. sergeant tish has been wounded--in the shooting on the
third floor, you know."

"i--i am afraid i don't know exactly what has happened; everything has
been such a terrible, excited jumble."

"one would hardly think so many things could happen in a quiet country
place like this," said wiggly.

joan shuddered.

"it's been horrible! the man--the wounded man i saw on the stairs----"
her eyes were upon tish; perhaps not so much upon tish as his bandaged
shoulder, where brown stains had seeped through the bandages.

"haskins is dead, ma'am," tish answered promptly, which was precisely
one of the things wiggly had not wanted him to say--not just yet. "i
plugged him when he winged me with the constable's gun, up in the
storeroom."

"doctor bushnell told me," joan went on tremulously, "that it was this
man who--who killed kirklan's wife."

sergeant tish caught wiggly's pleading signal, hesitated a moment, and
then temporized.

"w-well," he answered slowly, "i guess there's what you'd call a
division of opinion on that. our newspaper friend don't think so."
wiggly could have choked him. why did he have to tell her that he was
a reporter! and why couldn't tish have given him a square show? under
his breath he cursed the headquarters man's stubbornness.

"oh!" exclaimed joan. "so he's a newspaper reporter. i thought he must
be a detective, too."

"give 'im credit," grunted tish; "he's trying hard enough to be one."
he chuckled at his little joke.

"this--this man," pressed joan sheridan, now ignoring wiggly entirely,
"what was he doing in the house--in the storeroom? was he a--a burglar?"

"as a matter of fact, miss sheridan, haskins was the woman's husband."

joan gasped.

"you don't mean--you can't mean helen?"

"that's it, ma'am; seems that she had not taken the trouble to get
herself a divorce before she married gilmore." briefly he recounted
haskins' trouble with the new york police, his criminal record, his
flight from eighth avenue annie's with the automatic, his coming to
greenacres, and his method of gaining entrance to the house.

joan, leaning forward tensely, listened with wide eyes and parted lips.

"it was the gun--the gun that this criminal took away from you in new
york that killed helen?" she demanded breathlessly. tish nodded.

"then," she rushed on, her voice sinking to a whisper, "there--there
doesn't seem to be much doubt that the man--haskins--her--her legal
husband--killed her? did he say anything before he died?"

wiggly price leaped forward and stood in front of her, lest tish spoil
whatever chance might be left.

"let me ask you something," he snapped out. "what made you so positive,
hours before any one else in the house knew that such a person as
haskins existed, that victor sarbella was innocent of the murder?"

joan naturally was startled by this sudden verbal attack; all the blood
had drained from her already pale face, leaving her features ghastly.
her eyes met his for a moment and then lowered.

"why--why, what a strange question!" she exclaimed, but there was
a noticeable nervous catch in her voice. "i--i never doubted mr.
sarbella's innocence."

"i know you didn't, but what i want to know is--why?"

joan's head went still lower, but wiggly could see that her lips were
quivering.

"i--i just knew it."

"intuition, eh?"

"call it anything you like."

"was it intuition or knowledge?" wiggly demanded sharply. the girl gave
a suppressed start, which sergeant tish missed entirely; in fact, tish
had not quite recovered from his surprise at the way the newspaper
man had plunged in with these rapid-fire questions of his. wiggly
had a thrill of elation; his hunch had been right, and the girl knew
something.

his hand slid into his pocket, and his fingers closed about the bit of
tallow that he had found on the floor of helen gilmore's bedroom.

"look at this!" he commanded. joan's head raised at the compelling
tone, but her gaze, as she stared at the misshapen, somewhat soiled
lump of white, was merely blankly inquiring. it was quite clear, even
to the suspicious reporter, that this meant nothing to her. again his
hand went to his pocket.

"and look at this!" he ordered again, opening his fingers, revealing
the black hairpin in his palm. "look at it closely, miss sheridan, and
tell if it doesn't belong to you."

"how--how could i know that?" she stammered. "all hairpins are so much
alike. what--what right have you to ask me all these questions in that
tone?" she turned appealingly to sergeant tish. "has this newspaper
reporter a right to ask me these questions?"

"i guess that's a reporter's main business, asking questions," grunted
tish, with a slow grin; quite evidently he wasn't taking wiggly's
cross-examination with any seriousness. "might as well answer 'em, miss
sheridan; no harm in that."

"this hairpin," went on wiggly, "was found on the floor beside helen
gilmore's chaise longue. she didn't use black hairpins, and you do. do
you deny, miss sheridan, that you were in the woman's sleeping room
last night?"

for a moment, the barest instant, joan hesitated. "yes," she answered
slowly, "i do deny it."

"evidently you do not know," wiggly went on mercilessly, resorting to
a trick in an effort to force the truth from her, "that just before
haskins died he made a statement. he told us that helen managed to get
the automatic out of his pocket before she sent him into hiding on the
third floor. he was in the storeroom when he realized that she had got
the gun away from him. he came back down the stairs with the intention
of forcing her to return it to him. he was in the hall when he heard
the scream and the shot.

"the door was open, the light was burning inside, and haskins saw the
person who came out of that room!" this much, of course, was true,
and for his purpose he did not consider it an unfair advantage, this
failure to add that haskins had refused to tell more.

joan sheridan's hands were frozen tightly about the arms of the chair;
her eyes met wiggly's with a hunted, terrified look. she realized what
he meant--that he was virtually accusing her of the murder. but she
was a quick-witted girl, joan sheridan; she knew that sergeant tish's
attitude would not have been so jovially casual if he too had suspected
her of the shooting. she mastered herself wonderfully.

"why don't you proceed and say exactly what you mean?" she asked. "what
you mean is that you think i----"

"didn't you?" whipped out wiggly, leaning slightly forward until their
eyes were level. this time her gaze did not falter; it met his without
flinching.

"no!" she answered firmly. "i deny everything you have said and
intimated. if you have finished with your inquisition----"

price, realizing that his strategy had failed, offered no objection,
as she moved to leave the room. but when her steps had receded up the
stairs, he turned angrily upon tish.

"a nice mess you made of things!" he exclaimed hotly. "why did you have
to tell her that i am a newspaper man?"

"well, ain't you?"

"you didn't give me a square shake. you queered any chance that i might
have had to make her talk. you belittled me, and that took all the wind
out of my sails. if you'd backed me up a little, we'd have had her
dead to rights. if we could have made her believe that it was she whom
haskins saw coming out of the room after the shot was fired----"

"aw, forget it," growled tish; "she didn't croak the woman any more
than you did."

"probably not premeditatively, but there's one thing sure in my mind,
and you'll never convince me any different: either joan sheridan did
the shooting, or she knows who did--and she knows it wasn't haskins.
she was on the edge of a breakdown, but you braced her right up. and
you're called a detective!"

sergeant tish's face flushed. "see here, i'm not going to have any
newspaper scribbler talk that way to me! if i'd have let you have your
way, you'd have made a fool out of me as well as yourself. hairpins,
tallow! bah! i guess you think you are a detective--a real detective.
that's the way with you newspaper guys--always hunting for a chance to
make the police wrong, trying to make monkeys of the police department.
you make me sick!"

wiggly's ears moved violently.

"you wait and see!" he retorted. "sneer at hairpins and tallow, but i
know i'm on the right trail, and i'm going to stick on this job until
i've followed it to the end."




                             chapter xxvii

                      wiggly remains unconvinced


for all of his asserted confidence, which bordered upon boasting,
wiggly price realized that he had a hard nut to crack. swinging out
of the library and sergeant tish's presence, he went out to the porch
and sat down to indulge himself in logic, speculation, guessing. he
took the piece of tallow from his pocket again, staring at it fixedly;
his belief that it had some vital part in the mystery had become an
obsession; but there was one thing about it that discouraged him--joan
sheridan had shown no perturbation when he had produced it before her
eyes.

following a simple bit of logical reasoning, if the bit of tallow were
so important as he insistently imagined, and if the girl had done
the shooting, it was extremely strange that she had shown no signs
of agitation when faced with this evidence. he had been favorably
impressed with the girl's face; she seemed to be a sane, well-balanced
young person. certainly, he argued, it was difficult to believe that
she would have committed the murder after cold premeditation; but
might she not have yielded to a suddenly and insanely jealous impulse,
suddenly overwhelmed by the proximity of the automatic pistol?

no matter who did the murder, wiggly reasoned, it had not been a
premeditated crime; the slayer had not gone to helen gilmore's room
with a weapon. the weapon was already there. these cogitations, of
course, took it for granted that haskins' dying statement had been
entirely truthful; the reporter might have agreed with tish that the
whole yarn was a lie, except that he could not imagine a desperate man
like haskins deliberately leaving the gun behind. with the death of the
only person who knew of his presence in the house, haskins had nothing
to gain by cloaking the crime under the guise of suicide.

that joan sheridan knew more than she had told, wiggly was flatly
certain; he had studied every changing expression of her face and he
had seen the emotions which tish had missed. either she had committed
the crime, or else she knew who did.

presuming her innocence, whom was she protecting with her silence?
sarbella? that did not seem logical. why should she go to such great
lengths to protect sarbella? yet, other than sarbella, joan, and
haskins, there had been but one other person above the first floor when
the shot was fired, and that was the other mrs. gilmore, joan's mother.

"ah!" thought wiggly with a tingle of excitement, as his mind canvassed
this possibility. "there is the person that the girl would protect, her
mother. and the mother has kept closely to her room; the doctor had to
look after her. now what could have been her motive?"

that was a puzzler, particularly so since he had not so much as put
eyes on the woman. perhaps--this was guessing merely--the older mrs.
gilmore had been mistress of greenacres so long that she resented the
appearance of an interloper; possibly she had taken the frenzied
notion that she was to be dispossessed from this house which had been
her home.

both bates and kirklan gilmore, downstairs in the butler's pantry when
the scream and the shot had sounded through the quiet house, had been
positive that they had got up the stairs before any one would have had
a chance to come down; even haskins had verified that. their coming
had been so swift as to cut off his chance of escape. yes, decided
wiggly, counting haskins out of it, there remained just three possible
suspects. joan, sarbella, and the elder mrs. gilmore.

but the piece of tallow--he was not getting the answer to that. he was
still considering it when doctor bushnell's automobile turned in at the
greenacres driveway. the doctor was returning from the hospital with
the butler. a moment later the physician's touring car came to a pause
near the porch, and wiggly got quickly to his feet.

"how about constable griggs?" he asked.

"he'll make the grade, but it was a close call for him," answered
doctor bushnell. "mighty bad fracture. he'll have to spend a week or
better in the hospital. i've explained the whole situation, and he's
given me the jail keys and his permission to release sarbella, which i
shall do immediately. has the district attorney arrived yet?"

"haven't seen him," replied wiggly, eager for an opening that he might
have a frank talk with the deputy coroner.

"i telephoned him from the hospital and explained the situation in
detail. he agreed with me that there seemed to be no doubt that haskins
killed the woman; said he'd come right over. i'll drum up enough men
for the coroner's jury when i get to the village and release sarbella.
whew! i'll bet it's a load off of his mind; it certainly looked bad for
that fellow--mighty bad."

bates had gone on into the house; the doctor had not got out of the
car, his purpose in stopping evidently being merely to let out the
butler. his hand was upon the gear lever, ready to start his car in
motion again, but wiggly put detaining fingers on his arm.

"just a moment, doctor bushnell," he urged earnestly. "i know you've
made up your mind that haskins did the shooting, and that, since
haskins is dead, the case is virtually closed."

"certainly it is," nodded the physician. "i thought about it all the
way on the drive to the hospital and back. the evidence against haskins
is all that any reasonable man would ask. practically a matter of legal
formality, the inquest."

"i'm going to ask that you listen to me, with an open mind,"
wiggly insisted. "i want to talk with you about the case in utmost
seriousness; i feel that you're on the verge of making a grave blunder.
i've found something----"

"not more hairpins?" broke in the doctor with a faint smile.

"doctor, i'm no novice in contact with crime; and, while i'm not
nursing any notion that i'm a born detective, i've got eyes in my head
and a logical sort of thinking apparatus. without trying to toot my own
horn, i might add that i've helped my paper solve a puzzle or so, after
the police had fallen down on the job. i'm not saying that to boast;
just want you to take me seriously."

doctor bushnell gave him a quick, sharp glance. "i'll listen, as we
drive to the village," he said. "hop in."

wiggly hopped in, and, as the car got into motion, so did his tongue.
absolute conviction that he was right enabled him to give a forceful
presentation of his theories, and his short, punchy sentences were
punctuated by frequent twitchings of his ears.

he began by repeating in substance haskins' dying statement and
emphasizing the improbability of haskins leaving the gun behind, the
utter uselessness of haskins covering up the murder beneath the guise
of suicide. from there he switched to the piece of tallow, saving
any mention of joan sheridan until the last. the doctor, listening
patiently, gave him a fair hearing; but it is a difficult job to
convince a man who has already made up his mind to the contrary.

"now we come down to the nub of things," wiggly went on; swiftly he
voiced his suspicions concerning joan and his reasons for them. he told
of his effort to cross-examine the girl and the results.

doctor bushnell had an uneasy feeling, as he himself recalled joan's
perturbation of the previous night, but he brushed these thoughts aside.

"do you realize," he demanded sternly, "that you are intimating that
joan sheridan might have----oh, it's absurd, preposterous! i refuse
even to consider such a ridiculous notion. why, i've known joan all
her life; a sweeter, finer young woman never lived."

"did you happen to know that she's in love with gilmore?" wiggly
demanded, and at this suggestion of a motive the doctor's eyes snapped
angrily.

"so that's what you base all this wild talk on, eh? that reduces your
reasoning to further absurdity."

"i'm not accusing her of the shooting, doctor, but i'm absolutely
certain that she's hiding something; if not to protect herself, then to
protect some one else. her agitation----"

"humph!" broke in doctor bushnell. "what sort of a woman wouldn't be
agitated with all that's happened at greenacres during the past few
hours. whom would she be protecting? answer me that!"

"it would have to be some one who was on the second floor when the
shot was fired. tell me something--does gilmore or his stepmother own
greenacres?"

"gilmore does," the doctor answered. "his stepmother's share of the
estate was in cash and other realty, but i'm afraid she managed it
poorly."

"ah!" murmured wiggly. "then she was virtually dependent upon her
stepson. if things had become so unpleasant for her at greenacres after
the arrival of the house's new mistress that she could not stay----"

the physician's indignation became more pronounced.

"gad, what a villainous imagination you've got!" he exploded. "you mean
now, i suppose, that mrs. gilmore did the shooting, and that joan is
shielding her? young man, i've lost all patience with such nonsense.
i refuse to listen to these ravings any longer. any one, except a
hare-brained idiot, would know that haskins did the shooting. no more
of this twaddle; i simply won't listen to you!"

"then you won't help me with a further investigation?"

"i shall certainly have no hand in such foolishness," answered doctor
bushnell with a tone of absolute finality. "talk to the district
attorney, if you insist, but i warn you that he'll take no stock in it."

"probably not," wiggly agreed gloomily, "but just the same i know i'm
right."

they had reached the village, and the doctor's car came to a halt in
front of borough hall.

"i'll release sarbella and then get busy drumming up my men for the
coroner's jury," said bushnell. "you've got a sensational enough story
for your paper, as it is; forget that silly rubbish you've been talking
to me."

wiggly made no response, but followed the physician from the machine
into the village building and downstairs into the basement, where
victor sarbella was a prisoner. at the sound of their approach,
sarbella came to the door of the narrow cage and peered out between
the rusting steel bars, but he uttered no word of protest, of outraged
innocence; only stared in a stony, narrow-eyed silence.

"i've the best of news for you, mr. sarbella!" doctor bushnell
exclaimed heartily. "i've come to let you out."

the prisoner's head jerked up, his fingers tightened their grip about
the bars of the cell door, his lips parted, and his eyes brightened
with the look of relief that flashed across his face.

"you mean," he asked slowly, "that i am to be released
unconditionally--that i have been removed from suspicion?"

the doctor, with the constable's keys, was struggling with the lock
that would unfasten the bolts; the mechanism was badly in need of
oiling, and it was giving him trouble.

"yes, unconditionally," he answered. "we find that we have done you
an injustice, although you must admit that we were within our rights,
everything considered. the murderer of the gilmore woman----oh, curse
this lock!"

sarbella pressed his body closer to the bars. "yes?" he demanded with
an eager impatience. "the murderer--go on, man!"

the lock finally yielded, enabling the physician to turn the handle
that slid the bolts, and the door opened. victor sarbella was a free
man.

"tell me," he commanded again. "who----" the newspaper reporter sensed
his grave concern, his anxiety--and wondered.

"luckily for you," answered doctor bushnell, "the slayer was still in
the house--a criminal who, it developed, was the woman's undivorced
husband."

"thank heaven!" breathed sarbella, and it was apparent that this news
was a great relief to him.

briefly the doctor related the facts.

"what a blessedly fortunate ending!" murmured the artist. "i was
afraid of other things--something more terrible."

"i'm driving back to greenacres after i get together a jury for the
inquest," went on the physician. "i'm anxious to get it over with as
quickly as possible, for my private practice has to wait until this
official business is disposed of, and my patients are liable to lose
their patience." he chuckled a little at his own pun. "you may ride
back to greenacres with me, if you choose."

"thanks," nodded sarbella, "i will."

the three men made their way out of the basement cell room and to the
street, where the doctor said that they could wait in his car, if they
liked. a moment later he was hurrying along the village thoroughfare in
quest of his jurors, picking up practically the first citizens that he
encountered. sarbella got into the rear of the touring car, and wiggly
price sat beside him.

"you seem to be well out of a bad situation," said the newspaper man.

the released suspect nodded soberly. "yes," he agreed, "a bad
situation--an overwhelming situation. circumstantial evidence can be a
damning thing. perhaps i owe something to you; your attitude, when you
came to the cell about the cigarette----"

"you do not owe your release to me, sarbella; it was the appearance
of sergeant tish, his identification of the gun and the presence of
haskins in the house." wiggly paused for a moment with his eyes on the
other's face. "you were greatly relieved when you heard the doctor's
explanation of the tragedy?"

victor sarbella inclined his head.

"i was!" he exclaimed fervently. "knowing my own innocence, i am afraid
that i was as much inclined to suspect other people as other people to
suspect me. i am afraid that i even suspected my friend gilmore."

"why gilmore?" asked wiggly. "he had a perfect alibi--downstairs when
the shot was fired."

"yes, i know," murmured sarbella, "but the poor chap was so
overwrought, so beside himself, so obsessed with the suspicion that
there had been an--ah--affair between me and--and his wife--but let us
not talk of that."

"i wonder," pressed wiggly, but careful to make his tone carelessly
casual, "if you also suspected miss sheridan?"

"eh?" exclaimed sarbella, turning quickly, and then he laughed briefly.
"yes, i think i even suspected her. her attitude it was--ah--very
strange, it seemed to me. only excitement, of course, as we know the
facts now; but at the time--well, i hardly knew what to think."

wiggly's ears twitched slightly. further confirmation of his theory!
yet it convinced no one except himself.

"i condemn myself for harboring any such suspicions," went on sarbella
musingly, "but it was strange. she was up, had not retired, and yet she
had not heard the scream or the shot."

"what!" exclaimed wiggly; this was something new to him. he had not
known that. "you mean that she was up and dressed?"

sarbella shot him a quick, curious glance, saw his eagerness, and was
warned to sudden silence.

"let us talk of something else," he said. "am i to understand that
there are still any doubts in your mind----"

"haskins made a dying statement in which he denied the murder," said
wiggly; "he said, however, that he did see the murderer coming out of
the room after the shot was fired."

sarbella gave no guilty start, such as might have been expected, if
haskins' story was true, and it had been himself that haskins had seen
coming out of helen gilmore's room.

"what could you expect but lies from the lips of such a man?" the
artist asked. "thank heaven that the ending is as it is. this man,
this haskins, must have been the husband who went to my poor brother
with the story that unbalanced his reason and sent him to his death.
poor andrea! the hand of fate has avenged him! there is a god of
retribution!"

wiggly price made one more effort. his fingers went to his pocket for
that puzzling piece of tallow.

"had another look around that room this morning," he said. "on the
floor i found several pieces of this."

victor sarbella turned and glanced at the white, black-flecked,
shapeless lump, but he betrayed no more visible signs of emotion than
had joan sheridan.

"what is it?" he asked, frowning. "what of it?"

"nothing!" grunted wiggly price, as his arm raised in a disgustedly
impulsive gesture to toss it into the street. even his own persistent
faith in this as a vital clew was being badly shaken. yet his fingers
closed about the bit of tallow, and he returned it to his pocket again.
his mouth tightened.

"nothing--so far," he added. he was one of those chaps who just
naturally can't quit.

sarbella gave him a curious glance, shrugged his shoulders, and
dismissed both the man and the bit of tallow as of no further
importance; then he lapsed into a moody sort of silence. a moment later
doctor bushnell returned to the car; it had taken him no time at all to
drum his jury for the inquest.

"all right," he announced, "we'll be getting back and having things
over with. shouldn't take much longer than an hour: presley, our local
garage man, will bring the jurors out in a bus, and they'll be no great
distance behind us."

he took the wheel, started the motor, and the three men were on their
way back to greenacres. wiggly sat stiffly in the seat beside sarbella,
trying in vain to drive his brain over the hurdles. time with him was
short, for, as the doctor had just said, in another hour or so it would
be over. the law would have finished with the gilmore affair and write
the easiest, most obvious ending to the dramatic business of the past
night, charging the whole tragic account to don haskins and, through
his death, mark the whole deed as "paid."

once the verdict of the coroner's jury was in, wiggly knew, it would
be next to the impossible to have the case reopened again. he had just
about sixty minutes longer to prove he was right, and that the rest of
them were wrong.




                            chapter xxviii

                           the black smudge


along the ribbon-smooth road doctor bushnell shot the car at a lively
clip; one couldn't blame him, of course, for thinking of his private
practice, and one of his patients had been telephoning for him all
morning. he would have been the last man to hurry the gilmore case to
a legal finish, if he had thought there was anything to be gained by
prolonging the investigation; but he considered that the affair had
been solved to all reasonable satisfaction.

in less than five minutes they arrived at greenacres, and hardly had
the three men stepped from the machine to the porch of the house when
kirklan gilmore, evidently having seen them from a window, came rushing
out, both hands stretched out toward the artist. there were tears in
his eyes, and his voice was husky, trembling with emotion.

"thank god, victor!" he cried. "i've just heard the whole inside
of things from a man, the new york detective, that you're cleared,
absolutely cleared! you don't know what a relief it has been to me,
although i never did think, even when things were the blackest, that
you did it."

"and i appreciate your loyalty, kirklan," answered sarbella. the hands
of the two men remained clasped.

"forgive me, victor, for thinking last night that you--that you and
helen----"

"that there had been an--ah--affair between your wife and me," finished
sarbella. "yes, i was afraid that my silence would put dark thoughts
into your head, but----"

"why didn't you tell me?" broke in gilmore, and a peculiar expression
convulsed his features. "why didn't you tell me last night, out in the
study, that she was the woman over whom your brother----"

sarbella shook his head.

"no! i could not in honor do that," he protested. "you were my friend,
and the woman was your wife. my lips were sealed. she was your wife;
you loved her."

kirklan gilmore's face was still white, haggardly drawn, but he was
no longer the broken wreck of a man, tottering upon the brink of a
mental collapse, that he had been some hours before. he seemed to
have recovered from the first over-powering shock of horror; doctor
bushnell's course in placing him under the influence of a sedative had
apparently been a most wise one.

at sarbella's words his lips twitched piteously, but he managed to keep
control of himself.

"no," he said slowly, huskily, "i was in love with--with the woman
i thought her to be--in love with an ideal, a creation of my own
imagination. the woman i thought her to be did not exist--except in
my own infatuated fancies. and she was not my wife. she----oh, what a
nightmare it's been--what a nightmare!"

doctor bushnell stepped swiftly to his side and, taking his arm, urged
him toward the house.

"keep a grip on yourself, kirklan," he murmured in a kindly, paternal
tone. "it's been a pretty terrible business, old man, but that thing
we mortals call fate has cut a lot of the strings to the tangle for
you. it is better that things are as they are; it saves a vast number
of troublesome complications. it saves--well, trucking a lot of mire
through the courts."

gilmore compressed his lips and lowered his head. "yes," he agreed
dully, "you're right about that; it saves the courts."

"buck up, kirklan! as you say, the woman you thought her to be did not
exist."

"ah," murmured victor sarbella, "but losing an ideal is one of the
hardest things in life."

the novelist, leaning a little on the doctor's friendly arm, made his
way slowly into the house. sarbella and wiggly price followed.

"have all the legal details been satisfied?" asked gilmore, as he
lowered himself into a chair. "there is, of course, no question but
that----"

"but that haskins killed her," finished doctor bushnell. "absolutely
none, kirklan. there remains now only the inquest--a double inquest in
this case. one jury will suffice for both; the verdict, of course, is a
foregone conclusion."

there fell a brief silence, gilmore's eyes staring straight in front of
him, with a dull, vacant expression. no doubt he was thinking of the
bronze-haired, beautiful woman who lay upstairs, cold in death--the
woman who might have been.

"everything has become quite clear to me," he said slowly, more as if
speaking to himself. "she was making a visit to this haskins in new
york day before yesterday, when atchinson saw her on the street. she
must have gone there in answer to a letter that my butler tells me she
received that morning."

"atchinson?" doctor bushnell asked inquiringly.

"my publisher," gilmore replied. "since she was employed by the
publishing firm before our marriage, atchinson knew her quite well. he
said it was she, but i thought he must be mistaken. she had told me
that she was going to motor into the country. i wonder how it would
have all come out if the man, haskins, had not been trapped in the
storeroom?"

no one responded to that musing question. withdrawn unobtrusively
into one corner, wiggly had again taken the lump of tallow from his
pocket and was meditatively rubbing his fingers over it. suddenly
his attention centered upon those black specks that he had taken for
granted were dirt, caused, perhaps, by a soiled shoe sole pressing down
on it, as it had lain upon the floor of the room upstairs; he saw now
that those dark, almost pin-point discolorations were imbedded into the
substance. this, however, increased rather than solved the puzzle.

"the district attorney has come, hasn't he?" asked doctor bushnell.
"i took it for granted that it was his car i saw at the side of the
driveway, as we came up."

kirklan gilmore nodded absently. "yes," he said, "a young fellow--the
assistant district attorney, i believe. lasker, i think his name is.
he's upstairs looking around with that detective fellow, sergeant fish."

"tish," corrected the physician. "quite a game sort, tish; it was he
who shot haskins."

again gilmore nodded. "so he told me," he said.

"i think i'll go upstairs," added the physician. "it won't be long
now until the men who are to serve on the jury arrive." he glanced at
wiggly with a patronizing sort of smile. "are you coming up with me to
look for more--more hairpins, young man?"

the newspaper man smiled grimly.

"i'll go up with you," he said, "but it's not hairpins that i'm mainly
interested in right now; it's this confounded piece of tallow." he
turned his eyes toward the novelist and thought he saw a sudden
tightening of gilmore's muscles, a suppressed start. he was not so sure
about it. "tell me, mr. gilmore, were candles used frequently in the
house here?"

gilmore did not reply for a moment. "candles?" he murmured. "why, my
dear sir, what a peculiar question. i don't believe i understand."

doctor bushnell, moving toward the stairway, paused with a brief,
discounting laugh.

"our enthusiastic newspaper friend, kirklan," he explained, "thinks we
haven't begun to get at the bottom of things. he's found a few pieces
of tallow candle on the floor of the room upstairs; he's trying to
attach some importance to it--just because he doesn't hit upon a ready
explanation to it, i suppose. i'm afraid we've humored him a little
too much, in gratitude for the first assistance that he gave us in
identifying your wife."

gilmore was frowning slightly.

"and i'm afraid that i can't help him explain his little mystery,
doctor," he said. "so far as i can recall, there aren't any
candlesticks in helen's room; nor in my room, which is adjoining.
still"--he paused for a moment--"it does occur to me, gentlemen, that
the third floor has never been wired for electricity; the storeroom
is so seldom visited. if haskins had wanted to have a light up there,
a candle would have afforded about the only possible illumination for
him."

"ah!" exclaimed the doctor. "see, price, there's the explanation for
you! the woman must have got haskins a candle, and he carried it down
with him when he shot her. he probably mashed it underfoot and----"

"no, that will hardly do," wiggly interrupted with a quick negative
jerk of his head. "in the first place, i can't believe that haskins
would have been fool enough to have taken a light with him to the
storeroom; too much chance of the illuminated window attracting
attention. secondly, this tallow was broken into a good many small
pieces; the trodding of a foot on a candle wouldn't do that; it would
only have mashed it, and it wouldn't have scattered it several places
about the room."

doctor bushnell shrugged his shoulders. "oh, what matter!" he exclaimed
impatiently. "whatever explanation there is would probably be absurdly
simple."

before the physician could gain the stairs, sergeant tish and the
assistant district attorney were coming down. the latter was a
youngish, blond fellow, with rimless spectacles glistening in front of
pale-blue eyes; one could see that he appreciated the gravity of the
situation and the importance of his own official position, and that,
beneath his outward pretense of grim poise, he was a rather nervous and
inexperienced young man.

one look at young lasker told wiggly how futile it would be to approach
him with any theory calculated to upset the accepted situation; the
lawyer's words confirmed this impression.

"ah, doctor bushnell!" he exclaimed, frowning his best official frown
and clearing his throat several times. "i have just been over the
ground with sergeant tish, who has been kind enough to lay all of the
facts before me--in quite a comprehensive manner. i have canvassed
the evidence thoroughly. i quite agree with you, doctor, that but
one sensible hypothesis can be drawn. i would even call it more than
an hypothesis. the evidence is quite clear-cut and incontrovertible.
sergeant tish's markmanship has--fortunately for him, however--cheated
the electric chair of its grim function. there can be no question of
haskins' guilt; absolutely no question."

"in spite of hairpins, tallow, and such stuff," grunted tish, with a
grin at wiggly, evidently taking a keen delight in belittling him. the
young assistant district attorney glanced at the newspaper man and
lifted his hands in a gesture of depreciation.

"so this is the journalist you were telling me about. if positive
evidence were lacking, my dear sir, it might be very well to bear
these things in mind, but in a clear-cut case of this kind such minor
trifles become entirely irrelevant and immaterial. any other theory
than that of haskins' guilt is absolutely untenable. i am willing,
doctor bushnell, that the inquest shall proceed with the evidence in
hand."

"i think i hear presley's bus coming along the road now," nodded the
doctor. "he's bringing the men from the village."

from outside there came the sound of the lumbering, noisy conveyance,
bearing the coroner's jury. all attention at the moment was focused in
this direction, and wiggly, without a word to any one--he was playing
an absolutely lone hand now--made for the stairs. no one registered any
objection to his taking another visit to the second floor, but halfway
up he turned and saw kirklan gilmore's eyes fixed upon him in a sort of
set, expressionless stare. was it expressionless? wiggly had a feeling
that the blank look might be concealing a degree of--well, perhaps of
wary apprehension.

"humph!" wiggly said under his breath. "gilmore was downstairs when
his wife was killed; he couldn't have had a hand in it, and yet, dash
it all, i did get a reflex from him when it came to mentioning the
tallow. and he was pretty prompt in trying to find an explanation for
the stuff being in the room. i wonder----" but what he wondered was too
vague even for his thoughts. passing on up the steps to the head of the
stairs, he let himself into the murdered woman's bed-chamber.

"i don't know what i can expect to find more than i have," he told
himself discouragingly, "but the old line in the copy book used to tell
me: 'if at first you don't succeed, try, try again.' here goes for
another try. gilmore was startled when i mentioned tallow candles. why?"

obviously that question could never be answered until he found out for
himself what part the tallow had played in the tragedy, until he had
explained its mysterious presence in the room. he walked about the room
slowly several times and then dropped to hands and knees, crawling back
and forth, his eyes close to the rug, picking up all of the tallow that
he could find. presently he had quite a little accumulation of the
stuff, gathered from a surprisingly wide radius.

the palm of his hand was pricked by a sharp surface hidden from view
in the nap of the rug--another fragment of the broken vase. the vase
hadn't impressed him greatly; for that was one thing that could be
explained. as tish had suggested, if it hadn't been tipped from the
table, helen gilmore might have flung it at the murderer in a desperate
effort at self-defense.

yet, as he was about to toss aside the fragment of porcelain, his jaw
sagged, and a startled exclamation came from his parted lips, for there
clung to what had once been the inside of the vase, a small particle of
tallow!

"gosh!" breathed wiggly, his ears twitching violently. "the tallow was
inside of the vase when it was broken! the two go together; i'd never
thought of that. by george, i've been missing something!"

the shattered porcelain vase had, in light of this discovery, taken
on a real importance within wiggly's mind. hastily he began crawling
on hands and knees about the room, retrieving every piece of it that
he could find. when he had got together all of it he could find, he
placed all the pieces on the table, with the tallow in a separate
pile and, drawing up a chair, sat down and began to study it. still
no inspirational solution flashed through his mind; he began at
nowhere and ended at the same place. times without number he handled
the pieces, absently sorting and resorting them, and at last, with a
hopeless sigh of defeat, he realized that an explanation was beyond his
powers of either deduction or imagination; he was simply beating his
head against a stone wall.

"its no use!" he muttered under his breath. "possibly i'm wrong after
all! possibly----"

outside the closed door in the hall he heard voices. bates had come
upstairs to call joan sheridan and her mother to attend the proceedings
down in the library. wiggly wondered if they would ask him to testify;
probably not. doctor bushnell and the assistant district attorney would
not want him upsetting things and confusing the accepted explanation by
flinging his unproven theories at the jury.

for a moment or so the newspaper man debated.

"i know i've no authority to do it, and i will probably get thrown out
on my ear, if i'm caught at it; but i've got a notion to have one more
try."

leaving the piece of broken vase and the lumps of tallow on the table
where he had been studying them with so little result, he turned
toward the door, slipping quietly into the hall. the sound of voices
came up the open stairway; doctor bushnell, in his capacity as deputy
coroner, was swearing in the jury.

wiggly made for the wing of the house where he knew joan sheridan's
room to be. he had never rid himself of the notion that she knew
something about the murder that she would never tell unless it was
forced from her unwilling lips; and the only force to which she would
respond would be evidence.

her room was unlocked. he let himself in with the unconscious
stealthiness that overtakes a man who finds himself entering unbidden
places. closing the door gently behind him, the reporter straightway
went about the business in hand, which was to determine whether or
not the room might not reveal something that would incriminate joan
sheridan.

first, he went to the girl's dressing table; the top of it, except for
some silver-backed toilet articles, was barren; but in the right-hand
drawer he did find hairpins. quickly he compared them with the one in
his pocket; they were of the same size, color, and pattern. as alike as
the proverbial two peas in a pod; yet that in itself was slim proof,
for, as joan herself had said, all hairpins are so much alike. he had
to have more than that--a great deal more than that.

wiggly was closing the drawer when he noted for the first time the
black smudge on his finger--a smallish streak which flecked free from
the skin, as he rubbed at it with the ball of his thumb.

"hello!" he exclaimed under his breath. "what's that? where did i get
it?" with a curious and puzzled frown he stared at the dark spot on his
finger, as he continued to fleck off the black, grainy particles. he
lifted his hand to his nose and sniffed, and, as he caught the faint,
but unmistakable, odor, his ears fairly did a dance at the sides of his
head.

"great guns," he whispered. "it's powder--burned gunpowder! where did
i get that?" his bulging eyes swept the dressing table and the only
articles that he had touched since coming into helen gilmore's room.
and then he thought of the candle tallow and the black specks that had
mocked him with their enigma. slowly, through a fog of bewilderment and
incredulity, there pierced a dawning light of understanding. he had
solved the murder!




                             chapter xxix

                      "let the guilty man speak!"


the young assistant district attorney and doctor bushnell had indeed
reduced the double inquest to a cut-and-dried formality, and the
proceeding was heading swiftly toward its anticipated conclusion. extra
chairs had been brought into the library, and it was here that the
hearing was in progress.

in his capacity as deputy coroner, bushnell presided at a small table,
and near him, at his right, was the young attorney, blinking with
official severity from behind his rimless glasses; at the doctor's left
was the witness chair which faced the jury. the latter were an assorted
lot of village types--mr. judson, the ordinarily genial grocer, with
his fat, stubby fingers locked tightly in front of his ample middle;
henry blackburn, a local fire-insurance agent, who was tall, lean and
hatchet faced; jim striker, local manager of the telephone company; and
so on down the list.

there had been no move to bar any one from hearing the testimony of
the other witnesses. behind the jury chairs joan sheridan murmured
soothingly in an effort to calm her mother's muffled, hysterical
sobbing; a little apart sat kirklan gilmore, slumped deep into a chair,
chin on his chest and his eyes half closed; but he was listening
carefully; not a syllable was escaping him. victor sarbella was seated
nearest the door; his dark eyes were roving restlessly about the room.

sergeant tish had been the first witness, identifying the gun which
had killed helen gilmore and recounting, for the benefit of the jury,
how it had got to greenacres. doctor bushnell previously had given an
outline of the facts, as he had found them.

bates, the butler, followed tish and did not forget to color his
account of the happenings with a none-too-modest tribute to his own
shrewd deductions that it had been murder and not suicide. he was proud
of that little achievement. he told how he had been fast asleep when
the ringing of the doorbell had awakened him, and he had got up to
admit gilmore, who had been out at the studio and had forgotten his
keys; he described how he had been in the butler's pantry; that he had
just finished making gilmore a toddy, which the latter was drinking,
when both of them had heard the scream, closely followed by the shot.

joan sheridan suppressed a shiver, but no one noticed that.

"after that, bates?" urged doctor bushnell.

"mr. gilmore and i hurried upstairs. when we was about halfway up we
heard a door slam shut--haskins when he scooted back up to the attic,
i guess. the door to the younger mrs. gilmore's room was open, and the
light was burning. i went in first, and there she was--all covered with
blood, the gun on the floor beside the couch. it looked like suicide,
but i knew it wasn't, because she wouldn't have screamed before
shooting herself. she might have screamed after she did it, but the
shot was fired after she screamed. more than that; the door was open,
and, like i said, people don't shoot themselves with the door open."

"a very good deduction, bates," nodded the doctor.

"yes, sir; i rather thought so myself," agreed bates.

other questions and answers followed, and the entire ground was covered
swiftly, but thoroughly. the jurors were then asked if they wished to
interrogate the witness. none of them did, and bates was excused.

"miss sheridan, merely as a matter of formality, will you please take
the witness chair?" murmured doctor bushnell, and joan, her face
becoming a shade more pale with the ordeal, got slowly to her feet and
walked to the front of the room. kirklan gilmore's body tensed, and his
hand clenched, but he did not lift his eyes.

"i want you to understand," the doctor told her gently, after taking
her oath as a witness, "that this is a mere formality. you will please
tell us, in your own words, just what you know about the tragedy."

joan sheridan was plainly nervous; her fingers, resting in her lap,
were twisting about each other, and for a moment she did not answer.

"there is nothing--nothing that i can tell," she answered in a
strained, muffled voice.

"as i understand--in fact, from what you told me--you did not hear the
fatal shot."

joan's voice became a little clearer, as she answered: "no, i did not
hear the fatal shot."

"i might explain to the jury," added the doctor, "that miss sheridan's
room is in another part of the house."

from outside the library came the sound of hurrying feet, as wiggly
price came down the stairs, two steps at a time. just outside the
library he paused, screened behind the portières. across his arm was a
woman's silk dressing gown, and in his hand was a handkerchief, caught
up at the corners and sagging with the weight of the broken vase and
the particles of candle tallow.

"just the psychological moment!" he said under his breath. "it's made
to order."

"and there is nothing more that you can add, miss sheridan?" asked
doctor bushnell.

"there is nothing more that i can say," she answered.

"that will be all," murmured the doctor.

wiggly price entered the room, billowing aside the portières, as he
swept past them, and his ears were wiggling for all they were worth.
the silk dressing gown across his arm added to the dramatic effect of
his entrance.

"just a moment, miss sheridan!" he exclaimed. "what you really mean is
that there is nothing more you want to say. but i am very much afraid
that you will have to say something, whether you want to or not."

doctor bushnell leaped angrily to his feet, his eyes snapping.

"what do you mean by this, price?" he shouted. "i forbid----"

"i demand," broke in wiggly, "that miss sheridan be forced to explain
several things, including why she tried to clean spots from the sleeve
of this dressing gown that she was wearing last night." joan had
started to her feet, but sank limply back in her chair, a moan upon her
lips.

"look at her face!" cried wiggly. "isn't that proof enough for you?
don't look at me--look at her!"

joan's face was chalk white, and she swayed in her chair and would
have fallen, had not the assistant district attorney leaped forward to
support her.

"look at this dressing gown!" went on wiggly in a rush of words. "look
at the sleeve, here. i just took it out of her closet a minute ago; the
odor of a cleaning fluid, chloroform, can still be detected. and it
didn't take out the spots. she didn't know that cold water was the best
thing to remove bloodstains." he swung upon joan. "do you deny, miss
sheridan, that these are bloodstains? do you deny that you attempted to
remove them after the murder?"

joan's mother screamed shrilly. "it's a lie!" she moaned. "it's a lie.
he's trying to make it appear that my little girl----" a merciful
unconsciousness gathered her in.

doctor bushnell, dazed to a point of speechlessness, stared from the
accusing newspaper man to joan. there could be no denying the wild
terror that gripped her.

"if she does deny it," went on wiggly, "a chemical analysis will
establish that it is blood--human blood."

doctor bushnell at last found voice. "joan," he cried, "do you
understand what this means? this man is virtually accusing you of
murder. in heaven's name, say something!"

but joan sheridan, her lips twitching, shook her head. "i--i
didn't--do it!" she whispered. "i didn't do it, but i have nothing to
say--absolutely nothing to say."

"but, you've got to say something!" the doctor urged desperately.
"silence like this----"

again she shook her head. "i've nothing to say," she repeated.

in the excitement that had accompanied this sudden and amazing turn of
things, all attention had been centered upon the quivering, ashen-faced
girl in the witness chair, and no one--unless, perhaps, it was wiggly
price from the corner of his eye--had observed kirklan gilmore. the
novelist had leaped to his feet and clutched at the back of his chair
with palsied fingers. tears were streaming down his cheeks.

"great god!" he whispered. "that she would make a sacrifice like that!"
his voice raised. "tell them!" he commanded hoarsely. "tell them,
joan--the truth!"

joan sobbed wildly, uncontrollably. "oh, kirk!" she moaned.
"kirk--don't! in heaven's name--don't!"

"since joan will not talk," said kirklan gilmore, "i will."

wiggly price dropped his handkerchief to the table, and the loosened
corners fell back, revealing the little pile of broken porcelain and
the bits of tallow.

"let the guilty man speak!" he said. "if he does not--the evidence is
here."




                              chapter xxx

                         wiggly makes a wager


the room was tensely silent, as kirklan gilmore made his way slowly to
the front of the room and, with a shaking hand, took the glass of water
that rested upon the coroner's table. he gulped a drink nervously. he
put the glass down clumsily.

"it's impossible--utterly impossible!" doctor bushnell muttered
helplessly. "gilmore was downstairs--bates was with him--when the shot
was fired on the second floor. i can't understand----"

kirklan gilmore did not sit down, but stood there, leaning heavily
against the table, facing the coroner's jury.

"the truth," he said huskily, "would have been best in the first place;
the truth is always best. i suppose any chance that i may have had
is gone now. yes, i--i killed her--with that gun." he pointed to the
broken bits on wiggly's handkerchief. "the evidence is there. i felt
that it was coming when--when this reporter started talking--about the
tallow."

"suffering cats!" this interruption came from sergeant tish, who gave
wiggly price an uncanny look of reluctant admiration.

"it began," went on gilmore in a heavy, toneless voice, "on monday,
when helen went to new york to meet haskins, her--her husband." he
winced, as he said that. "that night she wanted money to pay the
blackmail of the man's silence. she lied to me, and i knew that she
lied, but she would not tell me the truth.

"the next day sarbella came, and i saw--we all saw--that there was
something--something that terrified her. i got sarbella out to the
studio, tried to force him to tell. i suspected a--a love affair. i was
mad with jealousy. he gave me his word that he had never so much as
seen her before, but i thought that was a gentleman's lie. it was true.

"that night--last night only, but it seems an eternity--i stayed for
a long time out at the studio, tortured by those black thoughts. it
was after eleven o'clock when i came back to the house. everybody had
retired. i went upstairs to my room. it was next to helen's. i was
trying to compose myself before i went in to her to demand the truth. i
had no weapon; there was no thought of violence.

"the connecting door between our rooms was locked--from her side, but
through the panel i thought i heard hushed voices. i thought--what
could i think other than that sarbella might be in there with her?
somehow i hesitated, and it must have been while i debated, trying to
think, that she got haskins out and to the third floor.

"and then i went in to her. she was sitting in a chair, facing the
door. i didn't see the gun; it was on the floor at her feet. my mind
was in such a daze that i hardly think i can make it clear just how it
happened. i think i told her that there had been a man in her room,
that i had heard them talking.

"i know that i was wild looking, disheveled, haggard. i had not slept
at all the night before. perhaps she thought i meant to kill her.
anyhow, she leaned over and picked up the gun swiftly. that was the
first time i had noticed it.

"'go away,' she told me. but i did not go away; i had come for the
truth, the truth from her own lips. i told her to put down the gun, and
when she did not, i did a very foolish thing; i attempted to take it
from her by force. i couldn't control myself.

"that was when it happened--in the struggle for the gun. it was her own
hand that pulled the trigger. i swear before heaven that is true." he
paused a moment, breathing heavily.

"the muzzle must have been pressed close to her body," he went on;
"that was why there was scarcely any explosion; her body muffled the
shot. she collapsed, and i put her on the couch. she did not move or
speak. that is how it happened."

the young assistant district attorney gulped, as if he were choking,
and doctor bushnell stared in dazed bewilderment.

"but there--there was a shot!" he gasped. "a shot--and her scream. i
can't understand----"

"he hasn't finished his story, doctor," said wiggly price. "he hasn't
told you how he worked the clever scheme of covering up the shooting,
trying to make it appear suicide." he pointed to the bits of porcelain
and the tallow. "there's the answer to that. he took the black
porcelain vase as his alibi, put gunpowder into it and tamped it in
with candle tallow, made a sort of firecracker. the wick of the candle,
from which he stripped the tallow, was his fuse. he lighted it and went
out of the house again, pretending that he'd forgotten his keys and
had been locked out; that was an excuse to get the butler up and to
have a witness to his alibi. bates could truthfully swear that he was
downstairs when the explosion sounded.

"those black specks in the tallow that have been worrying me all
morning, were burned gunpowder. don't think i'd have obtained the
answer to it, though, if i hadn't handled the pieces of the vase, and a
black smudge--burned powder again--came free on my fingers.

"after that it was clear; the murderer was some one who wasn't on the
second floor; that could mean only one person--gilmore himself."

lasker, the assistant district attorney, leaped to his feet.

"but in that case," he demanded, "what about the scream and joan
sheridan's silk dressing gown and the bloodstains?"

"i fancy," answered wiggly, "that it was miss sheridan who screamed."

bates, the butler, gave a violent start.

"it was!" he exclaimed. "i said at the time it sounded just like the
time she had screamed when mr. kirklan was thrown by his horse."

gilmore spoke again. "yes," he said, "the shot that awakened the house
was not a shot, but the explosion of the powder in the vase. when i
thought helen was dead, i was suddenly afraid.

"who would believe that was the way it had happened? they would arrest
me, send me to prison, and i was suddenly a coward. i--i don't know how
i happened to think of what i did; it just came to me suddenly, every
detail of it.

"in my own room, in a closet, was a box of shotgun shells that i had
used for duck hunting last fall. it was a simple matter to remove the
wads and take out the powder from two shells and pour it into the vase.
i had to go downstairs for the candle. that is all; it would take ten
minutes or so for the candle wick to burn down to the powder. i went
out of the house, but returned almost immediately and rang the bell.
bates let me in; i--i had to detain him downstairs until the explosion.

"when the scream came, i was even more startled than bates. i could not
understand that. and then when we got to the top of the stairs a door
slammed, and the door to her room was open. i had left it closed; also
i had turned off the lights, and they were burning.

"you can imagine the torture i was in. i tried to make myself speak,
but i was a coward. i was afraid of the consequences. i would
have spoken, if the net had tightened about sarbella; i want that
understood, that i should not have let an innocent man suffer.

"then haskins in the house--dead--it seemed to make me safe, to solve
the whole terrible situation. and it was not murder. believe me or not,
i have told the truth."

joan sheridan lifted her head. "yes," she said, "he has told the truth.
i had it from--from her own lips."

"what!" cried gilmore. "you can't mean that she--she was still alive.
merciful heaven, i let her die!"

"i was unable to sleep," joan went on slowly. "i had started downstairs
for a book. as i passed the door of her room i heard her moaning. i
opened the door and went in. i switched on the lights, bent over her;
that must have been when the hairpin fell from my hair, and i got the
blood on my sleeve. she was dying. she gasped out that kirklan had shot
her by accident. and that was when i screamed. the vase exploded an
instant later." her head lifted. "i realize that i am under oath; helen
told me with her own lips that it was an accident."

wiggly price wondered if this were true, or a superb falsehood to save
the man she loved.

"if it was an accident, why didn't you talk?" wiggly countered.

"the vase, his effort to hide by a porcelain mask what had really
happened," she answered.

"and that was why you were so sure that sarbella was innocent?"

joan nodded.

"but you stated on your oath," pressed wiggly, "that you did not hear
the shot."

"that was the technical truth," answered joan. "it was not a shot."

there fell silence; doctor bushnell fussed nervously with some papers
on the table, notes he had been taking of the testimony. the jurors,
although still dazed by it all, looked toward him expectantly.

"gentlemen," he said slowly, "you have heard the evidence and
the--er--confession. you have heard miss sheridan's statement of
the dying words from the gilmore woman's lips. i might add, as the
examining physician, that the nature of the wound makes it plausible
that it could have been inflicted in such a struggle for possession
of the pistol as mr. gilmore has described. mind you, gentlemen, i am
not trying to sway your verdict; i merely state that the nature of the
wound makes it plausible. are there any questions that you wish to ask
of any witness?" there were no questions; perhaps the jury was still
too aghast to think of any. "very well, the witnesses will retire,
while the coroner's jury considers the case."

when wiggly price stepped out to the porch he found himself beside
sergeant tish.

"well, tish," he said. "i told you that i was going to do it, and i
did."

sergeant tish grinned feebly. "i gotta hand it to you, you did," he
admitted. "and to think it was gilmore that did the croak! you didn't
have _that_ doped out. ain't it funny now that he didn't watch his
chance and make away with the evidence? guess he thought it was so
clever nobody would get wise. i wonder if the girl was lying about the
gilmore woman telling her it was an accident."

wiggly pursed his lips and toyed with something in his hand, the black
hairpin.

"i wonder, too," he murmured. "but, whether she was or not, gilmore's
story was straight, dead straight. it was an accident, but he got panic
and tried to cover it up by--what did miss sheridan call it?--the
porcelain mask."

"aw, g'wan!" grunted tish derisively.

"tish, i'll lay you three wagers: first, that the coroner's jury brings
in a verdict of death by accident; second, that the district attorney's
office will never go behind that verdict and bring gilmore to trial;
third, that gilmore and joan sheridan are married within a year."

tish snorted, but did not accept; had he done so, wiggly would have won
the first two and lost the third. it was almost two years before the
last prophecy was fulfilled.


                               the end.





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook the porcelain mask ***


    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™

project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.

the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.

﻿the project gutenberg ebook of stick to the raft
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: stick to the raft

author: mrs. george gladstone

release date: october 11, 2025 [ebook #77023]

language: english

original publication: london: the religious tract society, 1875


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook stick to the raft ***

transcriber's note: unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.



[illustration: a mean action.]



                            [illustration]

                           stick to the raft.


                                  by

                        mrs. george gladstone

                             _author of_

             "waiting for sailing orders," "norwegian stories,"
                                 etc.


                                london:
                     the religious tract society
            56, paternoster row; 65, st. paul's churchyard;
                         and 164, piccadilly.
        manchester: corporation street. brighton: western road.



                               contents.

chapter.

    i. the raft

   ii. kösen

  iii. karl schmidt

   iv. the miller's son

    v. the martyr spirit

   vi. the promised holiday

  vii. the secret

 viii. the schutzen fest

   ix. wrong set right

    x. the interview

   xi. the pool of bethesda

  xii. saved by the raft



                            [illustration]

                          stick to the raft.

                            [illustration]

chapter i.

the raft.

the fichtel-gebirge, or fir mountains, in bavaria, have been compared
to the garden of eden, because four rivers rise in their midst, which
were once supposed to be rich in gold, and to abound in precious
stones. some of the poor people in this region have been known to
search diligently, hoping to find treasures concealed in the beds of
the maine, eger, saale, or naab, which would enrich them, so that they
might dispense with hard labour and dwell in luxury for the remainder
of their days. but only a few peasants indulged in such dreams. for the
most part, the people were, and are, employed in felling the forest
trees, laying out new plantations, and burning charcoal.

hans richter was a wood-cutter and charcoal-burner; he was but a poor
man, as far as this world's goods were concerned, but he was rich
towards god, for he had a large store of faith and earnest trust in
his heavenly father. in fact, in his simple way, he scarcely knew what
care meant, just because he realised these words in their full meaning,
and not in a halfhearted manner—"casting all your care upon him, for
he careth for you." he had but little book knowledge, and could with
difficulty spell out the words of his bible, but he could pray: he
could talk to his god as he went about his daily work, or as he watched
the charcoal smouldering. and he learnt so easily, and had such a good
memory that he made many of the rich promises contained in god's word
his own.

richter was a widower with one son, a lad of fifteen, who was a great
solace to him. young hans was a tolerable scholar, for during the
winter months the forest life was exchanged for a cottage in a little
village, and then he went to school, and applied himself to study so
eagerly that he acquired more information in the five winter months
than his fellow-companions who attended the classes regularly all the
year round.

when our story opens, hans richter was suffering from a severe cold.
the winter had been a trying one, and money so scarce that very often
he could not afford to heat his stove. the long illness of his wife,
and her subsequent death, exhausted his resources, and incurred some
debts which he had only just paid off. in spite of these trials, he
did not lose his faith in god, but hoped that the spring and summer
work would be plentiful, and that the united efforts of himself and
son would enable him once more to accumulate a little hoard for future
needs.

the snow had disappeared, and the firs looked green and fresh when
richter and his son gave up their room in the village, removed to the
forest, and erected their hut. it did not take them long to build up
their summer dwelling-house, it was so simply constructed. the shape of
it was conical, and the poles with which it was made were covered with
the bark of the fir-tree. this rude hut served to shelter them from
storm and wind. it stood about two miles from the village to which they
had to go in order to buy bread and other necessaries.

richter did not remove all his household goods, though they were few
enough, to his hut. he left some of his furniture in the care of the
poor woman with whom he lodged during the cold weather, and only
carried to the forest such articles as were absolutely needed.

"father," said young hans, some three weeks after the hut was
completed, "you look very tired this afternoon, and seem so weak; lie
down and rest, while i go to work. carl and wilhelm will come when they
have finished their dinners, and we can get along quite well without
your help."

"i am very tired, my boy," answered richter. "i cannot tell you exactly
why, but i have never been the same since your mother died, and i think
the cold of last winter injured me. your young bones are not so tender
as mine, for you can run about and warm yourself; my cough prevents me
from taking sharp exercise, and lately it has hurt my chest. but don't
look so sad, hans; if my heavenly father wants me home, i am ready to
go. and i am not afraid of leaving you alone, for he will not forsake
the orphan, but care for you as he has cared for me. i'll have a sleep
while you cut down the branches of your fir; you'll manage to do that
easily when carl and wilhelm come. but wait for me before you set to
work on the trunk."

"is it to go to kösen, father?"

"yes; it is the last one we have to fell to complete the order sent
by the burgomaster. i shall take you with me to kösen so soon as the
raft is ready. when your mother was living, i did not like to leave her
alone for so many days, but now i shall be glad of your help. one pair
of hands cannot guide a large raft through the twists and turns of the
saale. you've had good practice in your time, my boy, and i think are
as clever as your father."

"i want to see kösen," answered hans. "i've never been so far; and i've
heard it's such a pretty little village."

"it is a town, lad; the people were anxious enough to have it made into
one, thinking they would have more privileges, but all they seem to
have gained is having to pay heavier taxes and support a burgomaster,
to whom they give a regular annual income."

"there is more to be seen and learnt in a town than in our tiny
village, or among these fir-trees," said hans.

"perhaps for you, but not for me. i spent some of my early years at
leipzie, yet i was glad when my father accepted the post of head
forester, and we came to our quiet little village for the winter, and
lived in the forest during the fine weather."

"but then, father, you had good reason to be glad; you have often told
me about your early life."

"yes, lad; i never grow weary of telling you how i learnt to know the
lord. i was a stranger to him before, and so was your grandfather.
your mother first taught us there was a better world to live for than
this. but i needed sorrow to make me think. it was on the day that your
darling sister died i prayed my first prayer, and promised to give
myself to my master's service. ah, lad, such a world of care has been
moved off my shoulders since then!

"how well i remember starting on a raft down the saale some few days
after that blessed hour when i cried, 'i am not my own, lord, for thou
hast redeemed me with thy precious blood, and i give myself to thee.'

"your mother came to see me off, holding you, who were a baby about a
year old, in her arms. before i unchained the raft, i kissed her and
said, 'good-bye! take care of yourself, and our only little one.'

"'good-bye, my dear husband,' she replied; 'stick to the raft, and mind
how you pass the weir at kösen. how glad i am to think that there's
another raft you'll stick to besides this one; a raft which cannot come
to any harm, but which will support you in the deepest waters and amid
the fiercest storms, when the sun shines, and when the rain falls.'

"i looked at her in astonishment, for i didn't catch her meaning.

"but she soon cleared up the mystery, for she added, 'i mean the lord
jesus christ; stick to that raft, and pray for his spirit to guide you.'

"it was a good saying of hers, hans; i've never forgotten it, and i
have ever called out to any one who was guiding a raft, 'stick to it.'
and what's more, if i have an opportunity, i tell them there is a
heavenly raft to stick to as well as fir-stems, and i say, 'hold on to
the saviour, forget self, and cling to god's promises in christ.'

"hans, lad, as a sinking man would hug his raft if any accident upset
him in the river, so i beseech you cling to jesus. don't forget my
words. now go to your work, and i will rest."

richter closed his eyes wearily when his son left him. "some day soon
i shall fall into the sleep that knows no waking. but when my summons
comes, i shall go gladly, and without fear," he murmured. "o father,
for christ's sake, make my boy true to thee."

the sun set, and yet the sick man slept heavily, nor did he rouse up to
take his supper.

after young hans had finished his day's work, he watched his father for
some time, and then he too fell into a sound slumber. the morning was
breaking when the lad was awakened by hearing his name called. he was
in time to catch his father's last words.

"i am dying," gasped richter; "the end has been coming for some time,
but i have fast hold of the raft, hans; i am not afraid of crossing the
river; i hold my saviour's hand, and he holds mine. i can say truly,
'yea, though i walk through the valley of the shadow of death, i will
fear no evil, for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort
me.' stick to the raft, my boy; stick to the raft."

                               ————————



chapter ii.

kösen.

kösen is a charming little city on the saale. it lies in a valley
surrounded by hills which are well-cultivated and finely wooded.
during the summer, the river is thickly studded with rafts made of
the trunks of fir-trees, principally cut from the forests about the
fichtel-gebirge. these rafts are formed by boring holes at the top
and bottom of each stem, and fastening them together with twigs. when
completed, they are launched on to the river, and the stream carries
them down to their destination.

"so help me god, i will stick to the raft," said hans richter, when he
left the village cemetery about a month after his father's funeral.
he had been there to plant forest-flowers on his parent's grave, and
to pray. and with a firm step he took the road which led to his old
landlady's house.

"i have called to bid you good-bye," he said as he entered her cottage
and shook her warmly by the hand. "i expect not to return to this part
again for at least some years to come."

"so i hear," she replied. "you must take a cup of coffee with me this
afternoon, and tell me why you are so anxious to leave your old home.
the last time i saw you i thought you were inclined to stay in these
parts."

"i am so lonely without my father, and feel i had rather go to some
place where i can learn more and see more. i mean to try and get some
work to do at kösen."

"that is a long way off, over seventy miles as the crow flies, and
perhaps double the distance by the river. it's my native place; i was
born there."

"i know it is a good distance, but i can't help that, for business
takes me to kösen; i am going to help wilhelm andrea. he is appointed
to take the wood to the burgomaster, now father's dead. the head
forester has written to a friend of his who keeps the toll-house, and
asked him to give me some employment. he says lads are often wanted to
help the rafts over the weir."

"that's true enough, for the weir is full four feet high. i can tell
you it needs a good rush of water to enable them to pass it at all."

"i can't quite understand how they get over," said hans.

"you know what a weir is, i suppose?"

"oh yes."

"explain it to me."

"wherever there's a great mill to be worked, there's a weir. it's only
a dam in the river to collect enough water behind it so as to turn the
mill wheel."

"quite right. you'll soon see the old flour-mill; it is a very large
one, and grinds nearly all the wheat needed in kösen for bread. now i
will tell you how the rafts go over. every raft, as you know, has a
man and a boy on it who steer with a fir pole, to which is attached
a boat-hook. so soon as the weir is reached, the master of the
toll-house, or his assistant, wades through the water from the shore,
and stands on the weir. he also holds a long fir pole in his hands,
with which he pushes the raft, so as to prevent it from drifting out
of the middle of the stream and missing the best point to shoot the
fall. the two on the raft have to stand perfectly still, and balance
themselves carefully while they glide down the rapid, and they very
often get a good shower-bath. i have watched many hundred rafts over
the weir at kösen, and also under the bridge; for the little town
boasts a long and very handsome old bridge over the saale. the moment
the raft crosses the weir, there is a deal of steering wanted, for the
water is often very shallow under the archways, and it needs some skill
to escape the buttresses."

"i like to hear all this," said hans, "but i thought the saale had
always plenty of water in it."

"not always; i have known it almost dry in some places after a long
drought. and i have sometimes seen the river so full in the early
spring, and the current so rapid that it tore the rafts apart, and
dashed the stems of the trees against the bridge."

"father used to say the rafts made a noise when they passed over the
weir."

"and he was right. i know that i often thought it thundered when
several went over in succession."

"i must be leaving now; we start away early to-morrow morning."

"i only wish i had some friends at kösen, for i would speak a good word
for you, my dear," said the kind landlady. "but i've been away so long
that all my acquaintances have forgotten me. i, like you, hans, have no
relations, for i was an only child."

"thank you all the same," answered the lad. "i don't feel so lonely as
i thought i should, for i have been so used to hear father talk to god
that since he's been dead, i've begun to talk to him myself much more
than i used to do."

"that's well. your father was a good man, hans; do you follow in his
footsteps. i am glad wilhelm is to be your companion; though i hear
he does not remain at kösen, but is going on to halle. you'll not be
long without finding new friends; only choose those who will raise you
higher, and not sink you lower, for we've plenty to pull us down here.
we need to have the constant presence of god's spirit in our hearts if
we would live upright and noble lives. farewell; may god go with you."

hans richter and his companion arrived at kösen on a beautiful evening
in june. the moon was at its full, and shone directly over the weir,
giving the rapid a silvery appearance. so exquisite was the scene that
many of the townspeople and visitors gathered on the old bridge to
watch the effect of the moonlight on the water.

kösen is one of the smallest towns in germany; it is not thickly
populated, save in the summer months when its saline waters attract
many strangers, as they are considered to be especially beneficial for
children.

"we will not go so far as the toll-house," said wilhelm andrea; "it is
too late to pay duty to-night. we will just moor our raft to a stake."

the raft was soon securely fastened to one of the many stakes which are
placed at intervals along the banks of the saale. and then hans and his
companion went off in search of a night's lodging.

they slept soundly in the small double-bedded room which they secured
at a little inn, nor did they awake until the sun was high in the
heavens. hans was the first to rouse up, but wilhelm was too tired to
think of the day's work which lay before him. so the lad determined to
go at once to the forester's friend at the toll-house, and ask if he
could find him any employment, for he did not wish to lose time; he had
to win his bread by his own exertions. the bundle which lay on his bed
contained his best suit of clothes, a pair of boots, two shirts, and
his father's bible; all besides he had disposed of, and after meeting
outstanding expenses with the results of the sale he had one thaler, or
three shillings, left.

before the boy set out, he read the twenty-third psalm, and thought of
his father's dying words; then he knelt in prayer to god, and asked
for a blessing to rest on him, and that he might find friends and
employment, and be honest, and not afraid of holding on to the right
in time of temptation. when he had ended his prayer, he rolled his
bible carefully up in his clothes, then tied the bundle in a large silk
pocket-handkerchief, and went in search of the forester's friend, who
was known in kösen as karl schmidt the toll-master.

                               ————————



chapter iii.

karl schmidt.

every raft which passes through kösen has to pay duty, and therefore
the little four-roomed cottage built on the banks of the saale just
above the weir is inhabited by the toll-master.

karl schmidt had served in this capacity at kösen for many years. he
was a quaint, queer, strange-looking man, rough in his manners, but
with a good honest heart beneath a rather unpleasing exterior. he had
no wife, nor had he ever been married; his neighbours often wondered
that he was a single man. he and his god, and one other, knew why he
chose a bachelor's life, for karl never talked about his own affairs.
many townspeople and strangers were admitted into the pretty parlour,
which commanded a view of the river, where schmidt transacted his
business when the weather was too wet or the days too cold to admit of
his taking his chair outside the door, but only a few of these were his
friends.

he was known to some in kösen as "old karl," and yet he was neither
grey nor infirm. it is true he had stray white hairs mingling with his
brown locks, but he was still in the prime of manhood, so perhaps he
earned his name because he was quiet in manner and naturally grave in
disposition. he was rarely found at a fête, and certainly never seen
in the public-house. yet he filled a great place in kösen, for he was
regarded by many as a friend in need, and his advice was sought after
and given cheerfully. by a few he was thought proud, but they were
among the prosperous people in his own class who had never asked for
his sympathy.

on the morning when hans richter sought him, he was up betimes, and
busy about household matters. first he lighted the stove and put the
kettle on; then he swept out the little kitchen and dusted and arranged
the parlour. afterwards he went upstairs again and made his bed and set
his room in order. this done, he tapped at the door which faced his
own. a feeble voice answered, "come in."

karl entered. on a clean bed lay a sickly woman, his mother, who had
been partially paralysed for some years. she was his great duty in
life; for her sake he had never thought of marriage. she had always
been an invalid, and needed many luxuries; and when she grew so ill as
to be unable to move without assistance, he was doubly thankful to god
that he could keep her in tolerable comfort. he loved her intensely; to
her he showed the gentle nature which lay concealed beneath the rough
exterior.

"how have you slept, mother dear?" he asked, coming to her side and
kissing her.

"much better than usual, karl," she answered, smiling at him fondly. "i
mean to get up when maria comes."

maria was an old woman employed by karl for a few hours every day to
attend upon his mother.

"i am so glad to hear this," he answered. "i'll make coffee at
once, and then i must go to business, for i hear the burgomaster's
wood arrived late last night, and i know he is in a great hurry to
begin building. besides, that boy will come on the raft who has been
recommended to me. i really think i shall try him, for i have been
obliged to dismiss robert."

"i am glad he is gone, for your sake, but sorry for his own. he has too
indulgent a father, and a bad companion in paul ebhardt, so that he has
no one to influence him for good. i did hope he would have turned over
a new leaf. i like the boy, with all his faults, though i fear he will
be a constant source of trouble to the miller. you'll read with me as
usual, karl, before you go out?"

"certainly, mother. i shouldn't expect a blessing on my day's work if
we neglected to read the bible and pray together morning and night."

"our daily services have been a great joy and a pleasant duty, my son,
for many years. i never understand how people like to go out into the
turmoil of this world's work without first seeking strength to struggle
with any difficulty, danger, or temptation that may arise. i should
as soon think of going without food as going without prayer; even in
my quiet life, karl, i have my battles to fight. i often feel cross
and irritable, and, but for god's help, i should tire you with my
grumbling."

"never, mother. i love you too well. i can't fancy you cross or
irritable. i rarely leave the room but what i say, 'god help me to
endure trouble as she does.'"

"and he will help you when trouble comes, karl; the back is made to fit
the burden. i used to wonder how people who were afflicted could be so
patient, but i wonder no longer now, if they are the followers of the
lord jesus christ, for i have found that as i have grown weaker and my
bodily ailments more severe, god has come nearer and nearer. you may
depend upon it, the sick ones whom jesus loves have a closer union with
him than those who bustle about the world. when we are ill, we are kept
quiet by god; his spirit holds communion with our spirit, and we hail
the communion all the more because we have no hope, no help, but in
him."

"oh, mother! how i like to hear you talk!—and it's not mere talk with
you. i am ashamed of myself when i see you suffer, for i would fain
keep you here, in spite of it all; and yet i know you must long to be
at rest."

"my son, i am at rest now. this is the rest of faith; the rest of
heaven will follow in god's good time."

the morning meal was over, and the morning reading and prayer, when
hans richter arrived at the toll-house. karl schmidt was standing
outside the door smoking his pipe.

"if you please, sir," said hans, "i am the boy that you had a note
about. please can you give me employment?"

"what can you do?"

"anything."

"anything sometimes means nothing. i'd rather know what you are able to
do."

"i can cut down trees, sir, make rafts, and since mother died, i've
cooked for father and tidied the room; and i'm a bit of a carpenter;
and i want so much to stay here that i'll try very hard and learn to do
any work you set me."

"i must think over all your qualifications. you seem to me to know a
little about many things, but i hope that does not mean that you are
steady to nothing."

"no, sir; i don't think that's a bad fault of mine. but may i tell you
what i want to do most of all?"

"certainly."

"i want to help the rafts over the weir. i heard you always employed a
lad for that, and i do so wish you would take me."

"why do you so particularly wish to help the rafts over the weir?"

hans hesitated, and karl noted his hesitation.

"speak out, boy," he said, somewhat sternly. "if you and i are to come
to terms, you must tell the truth."

"i never told a lie in my life, sir, and i hope i shall never be
tempted to tell one. i was only wondering if i dare just talk to you as
i used to do to my father."

"try me," answered karl.

"what i'm going to say has to do with my dead father, sir. the last
conversation we had was about the rafts, and the last words he said
were, 'stick to the raft.' and i mean to stick to the raft, and that's
why i want to stand on the weir."

"but i don't yet see what standing on the weir has to do with sticking
to the raft. you only stand on the weir to guide the rafts into the
right channel."

"i know that, sir. but don't you see i can say to all the lads and men
as they come over, 'stick to the raft,' and that'll, maybe, lead to
further conversation?"

"what further conversation?"

"it's my dead mother's idea, sir. soon after father gave himself to
the lord, he had to take a raft to a neighbouring village. and when he
started, mother told him to stick to it, and explained that she wanted
him to hold on to a raft which would bear him at all times. she meant
the lord jesus christ."

"i like that idea. 'there is a friend that sticketh closer than a
brother.' i'm not a man of many words, but i think i could say to
strangers, 'stick to the raft,' and maybe in some case i could explain
my words, and bid them stick to the raft in a spiritual sense. boy, you
have taught me something to-day. i'm a little too much inclined to let
people come and go without trying to do them good. but now tell me why
you have left your forest life."

"because i've no parents living, sir, and i'm very lonely. i had to
come to kösen with the burgomaster's wood, and i thought i'd rather
remain than go back, if i could find employment. and i want to get a
better education, for i'm at the top of the village school."

"you'll meet with many temptations here, and with boys who have no
principle to guide them, who will try and lead you into sin. are you
strong enough to refuse to be led away?"

hans thought for a moment before he answered, "i hope i am."

"in whose strength shall you resist? your own?"

"no, sir; from a baby i've been taught this, 'cast all your care on
god; he careth for you; and will not suffer you to be tempted beyond
what you are able to bear.' father had a habit of talking to god about
everything, and i try to follow his example."

"that's well, hans. i like the look of you, and my friend gave you a
good character, so i'll engage you to help men and boys stick to the
raft in both senses. but mind, if i find you have only talked fairly,
and are untrue or dishonest, i shall dismiss you."

"i am quite ready to serve you on those terms, sir. when may i come?"

"to-day; this morning, if you like. where did you sleep last night?"

hans explained that he and wilhelm andrea had found accommodation at a
little inn, and that his companion would soon be coming to pay duty on
his raft.

"i know he wants to start again in good time," he added, "for some of
the wood we brought down last night is going on to halle. it is not all
for the burgomaster. may i go back and help him?"

"certainly. i have only one more question to ask, where are you going
to lodge?"

"can't i be with you, sir? it will be so handy for me to be near in
case you want my services late at night or early in the morning."

"i've no place for you. but you will have little difficulty in finding
a room in one of the cottages. i will arrange that matter for you."

hans left karl schmidt with a light heart, and spent the rest of the
morning in assisting wilhelm. there was plenty to do, for the raft
was an unusually large and heavy one, and it took some time to break
it in pieces. then the stems for the burgomaster had to be dragged up
the bank, and the rest tied together again, so that it was late in the
afternoon before wilhelm was ready to leave kösen. his raft was now so
small he was quite able to manage it by himself.

hans was waiting, pole in hand, on the weir when andrea came, and karl
was close behind, ready to give the lad his first lesson. he proved an
apt scholar, and guided the raft skilfully on to the lowest part of the
weir, crying, "stick to it, wilhelm!" as it passed over.

wilhelm called back, "i will stick to the raft, hans, and i'll remember
all you mean by those words. good-bye. i hope you'll be happy at kösen."

                               ————————



chapter iv.

the miller's son.

herr klein, to whom the mill at kösen belonged, was a hard-working
man who had a wife and eight children to support; morning, noon, and
sometimes far into the night, he was at his business. he was a good
husband and an indulgent father. perhaps it was the easy manner he
had of dealing with the faults of his young ones that made his eldest
and only son robert so determined to lead an idle life. he was a lad
of sixteen who had no particular principle to guide him, and liked to
do nothing that gave him any trouble. the only thing he excelled in
was archery; he had carried off the burgomaster's prize for two years
in succession at the schutzen fest (shooting festival), and they were
about the only prizes he had ever won, or tried after, in his life.

finding that his son was so averse to work in his mill, herr klein
asked karl schmidt to allow him to try his hand at helping the rafts
over the weir. and as the toll-master was just then without a boy, he
engaged robert. but the latter, instead of helping, so often nearly
brought both men and rafts into dangerous positions that at last
schmidt was compelled to dismiss him, and, as we know, hans was engaged
in his stead.

in all probability robert would have seen his place filled without
being at all troubled had it not been for a very bad companion of his,
the closest and dearest friend he had, one paul ebhardt, the son of the
master tailor in kösen, who considered that it was an infringement upon
the rights of the town for a stranger to come and, as he termed it,
"turn out a fellow who was born and bred close to the weir."

it was evident that herr klein admired the look and bearing of hans,
for he said to his son soon after the lad came to live with the
toll-master, "i do wish, robert, you were as steady as schmidt's new
boy; i very much dislike seeing you constantly idling about."

but the miller did not enforce obedience, and truly he had no
confidence in his first-born, and was afraid of giving him any position
of trust connected with the mill. he hoped that as he grew older he
would be wiser. nevertheless he did not set before him the miseries
which must accrue from laziness, nor that "satan finds some mischief
still for idle hands to do." he was proud of his son, who was a
well-grown, handsome, good-natured lad, but beyond this had nothing
much to commend him.

hans had been in his situation for several weeks, and had given the
toll-master so much satisfaction that the latter proposed to his mother
that a bed should be placed in the kitchen to accommodate him. "he is
so handy at accounts, i shall be glad to have him to help me with the
books," said karl.

frau schmidt gave her hearty consent to the arrangement, and added,
"he will be a companion for you during the winter. i like the boy very
much, and i think if he is in the house, you can carry on his education
during the long evenings."

so a bed was bought, and hans was installed in his new quarters.
the orphan was very happy to be there, and thankful to god that the
influences of his home were such that he would be helped forward in the
pilgrimage of life. he already loved patient frau schmidt, and hailed
the days when she was well enough to sit up in her easy-chair and chat
to him.

hans was in the habit of taking off his boots and socks when he stood
in the water to help the rafts over the weir. he removed them as usual
one morning, and left them on the shore, without giving a thought as to
their safety, while he went, pole in hand, to assist four rafts, which
had been waiting for a good supply of water to pass over the weir.

robert and his friend paul were sauntering along the banks of the river
when they observed hans take off his boots and socks.

"let's hide them," suggested paul. "i hate that boy, and should like to
make kösen too hot for him."

"it's not worth while," answered robert. "if any one owes him a grudge,
i do, for he turned me out of my situation. but he's not worth a
thought."

"that's one reason why i dislike him so much," said paul. and he might
have added, "the chief reasons are that he rather avoids me than seeks
to know me, and on several occasions when i've invited him to go for
a walk, he has refused to accompany me. and one evening when i was
drinking at a public-house, he turned away."

this was true, for hans had been warned by his master to have no
companionship with robert or paul. "one is idle, and the other bad,"
added karl schmidt; "therefore you had better try to keep clear of
them."

hans knew this was sound advice, for he had seen paul behave in such a
manner that his own good sense would have told him to avoid ebhardt if
he would cling to the good.

"now do let's pay him off," urged paul.

"well, just as you like. we'll put his boots and socks under that
rubbish."

accordingly they were pushed under a nasty heap of refuse, and then the
boys hid behind the trunk of an old tree, and waited to see how hans
would behave.

in the meantime, the latter was fully employed. the first raft had only
one man in it, who was accompanied by a favourite dog. the creature
whined piteously, and was evidently frightened by the noise of the
rushing water.

"stick to the raft, and mind your dog," shouted hans.

the stranger, thus admonished, took the animal into his arms, and
planting his feet down firmly, passed the weir in safety.

"give me a help with your pole until i'm under the bridge," called the
man; "i'm not strong enough to keep clear of it single-handed, my cough
is so bad."

hans sprang on to the raft, and gave a few vigorous thrusts with his
pole.

"it's all right now," he said. "i'm afraid you are very ill. it seems
to me you are not fit to come down alone on this raft."

"i know that as well as you can tell me," answered the stranger,
curtly, "but a man must live. mine will be a short life, and by no
means a merry one."

"you managed to stick well to the raft as you passed over the weir,"
replied hans; "and if you'll stick to another kind of raft, you'll be
able to meet any sickness that comes."

"what do you mean?"

"why, the bible tells us that jesus christ came into the world to save
us from sin; and if we cling to him in all our troubles, we shall be
able to bear them."

"what stuff are you talking to me, boy?" exclaimed the man, angrily. "i
want no more help, now we are safely under the bridge. thank you for
what you've done, but let me give you a word of advice: if you use that
sort of talk to strangers, you'll get a thrashing one of these days.
the idea of a child like you setting up to teach grown men!"

hans felt very sore as he walked quickly back to the weir; he was more
than sore, quite cross, and indignant that his words had been received
in such an uncourteous spirit. but he had no time then to indulge his
vexation, for the three remaining rafts had to be helped over. he
did his best, save only that no words escaped him beyond what he was
compelled to say; he did not cry out cheerily, "stick to the raft; take
care; keep in the current!"

so soon as he had completed his morning's work, he prepared to go home,
but, to his dismay, he found that his boots and socks were gone.

hans looked about in every direction in vain, and at last relinquished
the search, fearing his master would be waiting dinner for him. paul
had no mind to allow his victim to escape thus easily, so he broke into
a derisive laugh. then, for the first time, hans discovered that robert
and his friend were watching his movements, and he felt sure they had
played him a trick.

"where are my boots? you've taken them away," he called out.

"that's like your impudence, young fellow," said paul, coming toward
him, followed by robert; "it's as good as calling us thieves. take that
for being so impertinent!" and he struck hans a violent blow across the
mouth.

as we know, hans was out of temper, not only annoyed at the stranger,
but vexed at losing his boots. he sprang on to paul, and before the
latter could defend himself, he was stretched full length on the grass.

"you coward! how dare you hit me?" he cried. "you're in my power now.
tell me where are my boots, or i will thrash you."

"help me, help me!" screamed paul, "robert, he'll kill me."

"no, i shall not," answered hans. "give me your hand; i'm sorry i was
in such a temper." for a still small voice whispered, "is that sticking
to the raft?"

"i really call that first-rate behaviour," said easy robert, roused for
once to have an opinion of his own. "he had you down, and no mistake,
paul. you'll find your boots under the rubbish heap, hans."

"you shall answer for this," muttered paul, slowly rising from the
ground. "i will be revenged on you, hans richter. paul ebhardt
generally remembers to pay off any grudge he owes. come along, robert."

hans found his boots and socks, but it took him some minutes to shake
off the dust and dirt with which they were covered. and thus he was
fully a quarter of an hour late for dinner.

the toll-master was busy with a customer, so that he made no comment on
his want of punctuality.

the meal passed almost in silence, for the lad was so busy with
himself, and though his master addressed him once or twice he only
replied in monosyllables.

it was karl schmidt's habit to spend half-an-hour with his mother after
dinner, and latterly hans had been admitted to the conference, and very
much he valued the advice and counsel he received from the sick woman.
on this day, a friend came to see karl, so hans went up alone to the
invalid.

"oh, frau schmidt, may i tell you all—everything?" he asked, kneeling
down by the side of her arm-chair.

"what have you to tell me?" she asked, passing her hands over the
upturned face. "there has been something amiss to-day; you have been
crying."

"and i'm sure you will say i ought to cry, dear frau, for i have been
so very wicked. i am a regular hypocrite." and hans poured into her
ears the history of the morning's adventures.

"poor boy!" she said, kindly. "yes, you have failed to stick to the
raft; you have forgotten to cling to the one who is mighty to save,
and have allowed self to gain a victory. the hardest battle we have to
fight in our christian course is the battle with ourselves. we think we
are doing great things, and then perhaps a rebuff comes, and, instead
of searching into our motives and crying out for the spirit of the
living god to show us ourselves and bring us anew to jesus, we grow
angry and vexed that we are despised and misunderstood."

"yes, yes; you are right, dear frau," said hans, the tears coming
afresh at the words he heard. "i was so angry with the stranger, and
wounded because he scolded me."

"the next time you receive a rebuff, contrast your trials with his who
endured such contradiction of sinners against himself—who was tempted
in all points, and yet without sin. pray for the indwelling of his
spirit when you try to do his work, and ever remember that when he was
reviled, he reviled not again, but was despised and rejected of men,
a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and we hid as it were
our faces from him. we have many lessons to learn, which will only be
learnt through tears, but they will be blessed tears, for 'they that
sow in tears shall reap in joy.'"

karl entered the room at this moment, and hans made his escape, and
left frau schmidt to explain to his master why he went away so abruptly.

"i am sorry all this has happened," remarked karl, when he had heard
the particulars. "i do not mean that i am sorry hans received a
scolding from the man on the raft, for in the master's service he
must not expect all sunshine. but i am sorry he has provoked paul
ebhardt, for that boy will not easily forget that he has for once been
conquered."

                               ————————



chapter v.

the martyr spirit.

hans never found his days too long; he had lessons to learn when his
master did not require his services, and besides this, he practised
shooting at the target. the festival was to be held in august, when the
burgomaster invited all the boys of kösen to enter their names among
the lists of competitors for his prize, and karl schmidt advised him to
try for it, promising to give him instruction in archery.

the toll-keeper's cottage stood alone in quiet nook, and behind it
a pathway ran up a slope—which was richly carpeted with flowers and
furze, with here and there an old tree standing—on to higher ground,
where was a pretty pine-wood with rustic seats placed in all directions
for the accommodation of visitors. this spot commanded a delightful
view of the town of kösen and its winding river.

hans was able to set up his target behind the toll-house, and practise
there under the superintendence of his master, who had shot well in
his youthful days, and who not only gave him lessons in the art, but
furnished his pupil with his own bow and arrows. no sort of teaching
came amiss to hans; he was naturally so clever that he soon mastered
difficulties, for he gave his whole attention to whatever he undertook.

"they say that hans richter has entered his name on the list of
competitors for the burgomaster's prize," said paul ebhardt to his
friend robert. "do you mean to let him win it away from you?"

"he is not likely to get it," answered robert. "he is only a raw fellow
from the forest who has had no practice; i'm not afraid of him."

"i say he means to win," said paul. "i am told he has put his target
on the low ground by the toll-house and that he practises there every
evening, and karl schmidt helps him. my father says karl knows what he
is about; some years ago he was the best shot in kösen."

"for all that, i'm not afraid," replied robert.

"don't be such a dolt!" exclaimed his friend, angrily. "i detest hans,
and i can't think what you mean by being so careless over your prize. i
suppose if he wins it away from you, you will say, thank you."

"no, indeed i shan't," answered robert, with some spirit. "but," he
added, more quietly, "he'll stand no chance, never fear."

"you don't know how well he shoots. come with me this evening, and let
us watch him. and then you will better understand that you will be
beaten if you don't take care."

accordingly, that evening paul and his friend secreted themselves
behind a tree which stood very near to the target, where they could
see, yet not be seen, without running any risk of being struck by a
stray arrow.

it was well that karl schmidt was present, otherwise paul would have
done his best to excite his friend to pick a quarrel with hans. robert
found that the arrows went near the bull's-eye, and even into its
centre now and then—showing that hans had a correct eye, and only
needed to persevere in order to equal if not excel him.

every time he shot an arrow, paul whispered triumphantly, "i told you
he would be a match for you."

yes, certainly robert had a rival to fear.

when hans and his master went into the cottage, the friends emerged
from their hiding-place. paul's face expressed his gladness, for he
saw that robert was more annoyed and vexed than he had ever seen him
before. so, instead of deriding his companion, he changed his tactics
and began to pity him.

"old fellow," he said, laying his hand on robert's shoulder, "i'm sorry
for you. he is sure to win, and you'll lose. it is a great shame that
this fellow who is a stranger in kösen, should put himself forward and
gain a prize from our burgomaster, over one who belongs to our town."

"but he has not won it yet. and what is more, he shall not win it,"
said robert—"that is, if i can beat him."

"you may try, but as sure as my name is paul ebhardt, so sure am i
he'll win; so make up your mind to lose. his hand is more steady and
his eye more correct than yours; he only wants practice."

"he will not win the prize," said robert, confidently.

"he ought not to, but i am afraid he will succeed. i wish, with all my
heart, we could contrive some means of preventing him from shooting in
the match."

"shall we go to the burgomaster and say that he is a stranger here, and
that we pray he will only permit our kösen boys to compete?"

"no; that won't do exactly. the burgomaster will tell you that he can
make no rules of the kind. perhaps i shall think of some other plan. i
have to pay the rascal off for insulting me."

paul felt he had a right to annoy hans, and he wanted to be revenged on
him,—forgetting he had in the first instance thrown down the gauntlet,
and that, before that unfortunate encounter by the river-side, he had
no real reason to dislike him.

it was on saturday evening when the friends watched hans richter shoot;
we will see in what spirit they awoke on sunday morning.

robert's first thoughts were these: "i'll lose no time, but practise
hard, so that i may enter into fair competition with richter—for, after
all, he has as much right to try for the burgomaster's prize as i have,
but he is not going to succeed." away from his friend he was more
inclined to act fairly towards hans.

paul ebhardt's waking thoughts were these: "that fellow, richter, shall
not have the prize if i can make him lose it. this shall be my revenge
for his behaviour to me. i must try and work out some plan to prevent
him from winning, for i see he is very anxious to be first. but how
it's to be done i don't exactly know. there are, fortunately, some days
before the festival."

to hans, this sunday morning brought very different feelings. when he
awoke, he remembered it was god's own day, and that he would hear the
gospel of jesus christ preached in the old church. he would go to a
bible-class in the afternoon, and the remainder of the day would be
spent with frau schmidt and his master.

the hours sped along only too quickly for him. and as soon as he had
taken afternoon coffee to the invalid and his master, he joined them,
bible in hand.

frau schmidt had been unusually well, and had enjoyed the beautiful
summer day from her open window; the air was so still, the sun so
bright, and the peace and rest of the scene without harmonised so well
with the abiding sense of peace and rest which filled her own soul.
though she was unable to go beyond her bedroom, she was thankful to be
able to sit in her comfortable arm-chair and enjoy the pretty landscape.

"i have something very interesting to read to you," said karl schmidt,
as hans entered the room. "you will be surprised to hear that it has to
do with a fête and that i mean to give you a holiday to attend it."

"thank you, sir, but please tell me something about the fête before you
begin to read."

"it is called a 'cherry feast.' the reason why this name is given to
it, i will explain later."

"where is it held, sir?"

"at naumburg, a town about five miles from here. thither many young
men and maidens, as well as old folks and children, repair on the 28th
of july. the name of john huss, the great reformer, is associated with
this fête. do you know who he was?"

"no, sir."

"i thought, if you approved, mother, i would read hans an account of
this good man, because he will learn from it how much a true christian
can endure, who rests entirely on his saviour."

"do, karl; i shall enjoy listening to it," answered frau schmidt. "john
huss was a very great man, and above all, great in his abounding love
towards god. he cared not for prison, nor chains, nor mockings. his
persecutors could not hurt his soul, however much they might inflict
pain on his body. read on, karl."

"john huss was born at hussineez, a town on the borders of bavaria, in
july, 1369. his parents were poor, and he was early accustomed to do
hard work and take very sparingly of food. at the age of twenty-seven
he entered the university of prague, and at the close of the 14th
century became confessor to sophia, queen of bohemia, and preacher in
what was called the bethlehem chapel, attached to the university.

"wycliffe, who has been justly styled the greatest of all reformers
before the reformation, was at this time creating a formidable
revolution in the religious life of england and scotland by his
preaching, and writing; nor was it long before this new teaching
penetrated to the continent, and spread even into bohemia, where it
stirred the spirits of some good men. among the number was john huss,
who said, when speaking of the effect of these writings of wycliffe on
his mind, 'i am drawn to them by the manner in which they strive to
lead all men back to christ.'

"in the year 1414 huss was charged with teaching heresy, and summoned
by the emperor sigismund to appear before the council of constance. he
obeyed the summons, and went in the strength of god, having besought
of his heavenly father wisdom to answer his accusers and strength to
remain firm to his saviour. the emperor furnished him with a letter to
ensure his safe-conduct; and, accompanied by several friends, he set
out to constance, and reached that town on the 3rd of november.

"he was permitted to remain unmolested during four weeks; and that time
he employed in freely explaining his opinions and entreating to be
heard publicly. but such was not the intention of his enemies, for on
the 28th of november he was thrown into a dungeon; nor did the emperor
interfere, in spite of his promise, beyond procuring poor huss a more
airy prison.

"for seven months he remained in confinement, and during this period
his health became greatly impaired from the rigorous treatment he
received at the hands of his tormentors. in the month of june he was
brought before the council, and ordered to abjure errors which he had
never believed. nor was it only on one occasion, for four times did
huss appear before these cruel men. 'how can i abjure what i never
held?' he asked repeatedly.

"after his fourth appearance the council gave him a choice of two
things—recantation or death; and sent him back to prison to deliberate
as to which of the two he would accept.

"but huss needed no time for deliberation; he made his choice when he
determined to know only christ, and him crucified; and he never proved
false to his master, though his friends entreated him to save his life
at any cost. 'i write in prison and chains,' he says in a letter to
some friends, 'expecting to-morrow to receive sentence of death, but
full of hope in god that i shall not swerve from the truth, nor abjure
errors imputed to me by false witnesses.'

"the sentence of death was soon passed upon john huss. it was read to
him in the presence of the emperor and council. the persecuted man fell
on his knees, and cried, 'lord jesus, forgive my enemies. thou knowest
i have been falsely accused by them; forgive them for the sake of thy
great mercy.'

"his persecutors answered this prayer with loud laughter and shouts of
derision, which followed him even to the place of execution. when he
was heavily laden with chains and led to the stake, he exclaimed, 'i
willingly wear these for christ's sake, who bore still more grievous
ones.'

"before the fire was kindled he was again besought to recant. 'what
error should i recant,' he cried, 'when i am conscious of none? the
chief aim of my preaching has been to teach men repentance and the
forgiveness sins, according to the truth of the gospel of jesus christ.'

"so the fire was kindled, and the smoke and flames rose around him; but
in the midst of it all his voice was heard, and these were his words:
'jesus, son of the living god, have mercy on me.'"

hans drew a deep sigh when karl closed the little book from which he
had been reading.

"what a grand death to die!" he said. "it reminds me of the martyr
stephen. i've been reading about him to-day. he fell asleep in jesus
after he had cried with a loud voice, 'lord, lay not this sin to their
charge.' i wonder if i could forgive my enemies like that!"

"yes, my dear boy, you could, if you were sticking to the raft,"
said frau schmidt. "the law of forgiveness was taught these good men
by their blessed master, and they were his followers. methinks that
master's words were yet ringing in the ears of stephen, 'father,
forgive them, they know not what they do.' he found it no hard task to
pray, as did his lord, that his cruel tormentors might be forgiven."

"i see it all," answered hans; "mother's words must be felt in my heart
if i mean them to come out in my life. i must really 'stick to the
raft' so tightly that god's promises will be mine. but, sir, i don't
quite understand what the death of john huss has to do with the fête."

"i am going to tell you now," answered karl; "i only waited until my
mother had spoken. in the year 1482, procopius, the wild leader of
the hussites, came with his army to naumburg, and besieged the city,
because bishop gerhard of that town, who was a member of the council
of constance, was one of the men who condemned the noble huss to be
burnt at the stake. he was induced to raise the siege by the entreaties
of the children who flocked to his camp, and prayed him to depart and
leave them in peace. so earnestly did these young ones plead that
procopius heard them, and promised to withdraw his army. nor did he
send the children away empty, for he gave them a liberal supply of
cherries; hence this event is commemorated by what is called 'the
cherry feast.'"

"how much i shall like to go! i suppose it is very gay at naumburg.
what do the people do?" said hans.

"you shall see for yourself," replied his master. "and now come, my
boy, let us stroll along the river-side this beautiful summer evening."

                               ————————



chapter vi.

the promised holiday.

the 28th of july came on the following thursday. hans counted the days,
nay, almost the hours, which must intervene; he longed so much to see
what the cherry feast was like. the special train which left kösen at
mid-day was not to return until late in the evening; for fireworks were
to conclude the entertainment, and they could not be let off until
after nine o'clock.

hans was dressed in a new suit of clothes, a present from his master.
karl was growing increasingly fond of him; he had never met his equal
before, and was fast forgetting the relations they bore to one another.
the lad was growing to be more like an adopted son than a hired servant.

"i have come to show myself in my new suit," said hans, after tapping
at frau schmidt's door to ascertain if he might enter. "isn't it a nice
one? it fits capitally. oh, i am so happy, dear frau, i have such a
kind master; and i love you so much—you seem to help me on my way."

[illustration: hans in his new suit.]

the invalid smiled kindly on the boy. "i'm glad i help you, my dear,"
she replied; "it's pleasant for a sick woman to know she is some use
in god's world. yes, hans, even i have my work to do, or my master
would call me hence. perhaps it is to cheer and strengthen you on in
your pilgrimage. but i will not sermonise to-day, but wish that you may
enjoy yourself, and remember you can do so and yet stick to the raft."

hans reached the railway-station in good time, and before the train
started some hundred and fifty young people, and children, with a
sprinkling of old folks, were gathered on the platform. among the
number were paul ebhardt and robert klein. hans had not spoken to the
former since their quarrel by the river-side, and the latter had only
addressed him once, and then it was to say, "how could you attack paul?
he hates you now, and will not forgive you in a hurry."

naumburg is pleasantly situated in the valley of the saale; it lies in
the midst of vine-covered hills: for this is one of the most northerly
places in europe where the vine is cultivated, though the wine it
produces is little better than vinegar. an old wall runs round part
of the town, which contains some fine streets and handsome public
buildings. just without the wall is a meadow in which the friedens
hügel, or hill of peace, stands, where procopius pitched his camp, and
where the children flocked to entreat him to spare their beloved city.

the fête was unusually well attended. there were sports of all kinds
which lasted through the day and into which the young people entered
heartily, while their parents sat under the trees and looked on.

hans enjoyed the fun intensely. it was quite a new scene for this
forest boy. he came across paul and robert several times, but they
seemed quite as anxious as he was to avoid any intercourse; indeed,
only robert returned the nod which hans gave when he recognised them
on the platform. nor were refreshments forgotten; various places were
established in different parts of the meadow where a good supper could
be had, and cherries abounded. it seemed as if all the old women in
naumburg had turned out, so many were there, with baskets full of
cherries, from which they filled plates and offered them for sale at
the rate of an english halfpenny per plate.

hans had money given to him by his master for refreshment, and he very
soon settled what he should eat. there was an old man who had taken up
his position in a quiet corner, just within the wooden paling that ran
on one side of the meadow; he sold hot sausages, and to him the lad
repaired when he felt hungry.

the old man was bent with age, but looked shrewd and quite competent
to execute the work he had undertaken. he had a strange sort of
cooking-stove; he put twelve bricks side by side, on to a wooden table,
and made a fire on them, so that the gridiron could stand on the hot
embers and thus keep the sausages simmering; while some rolls and
half-a-dozen plates were ranged round the bricks to be in readiness for
customers.

hans entered into conversation with him, for it so happened no other
customer was waiting to be served. thus he learnt that the old man
earned his living by going about the country selling sausages.

"it's a hard life, young master," he said, "and sometimes i long for a
room where i may end my days, but the money doesn't come in fast enough
for that. i can just manage to get a living, and that's all. but i
thank my god for his great mercy to me. if i grow downhearted, i think
of my dear jesus, who said, 'foxes have holes, and the birds of the air
have nests; but the son of man hath not where to lay his head,' and
that comforts me."

"you stick to the raft, i can see," answered hans, and then he
explained what he meant by these words.

afterwards they chatted about the different fêtes the old man had in
prospect, and the latter said he expected to be at the schutzen fest,
and that he went to it every year because he always did a brisk trade
after the match was over.

"the exercise seems to give them all an appetite," he added; "and even
those who don't take any part in the shooting, but only look on, get
very hungry. sometimes i stay at kösen for several days."

on hearing this, hans told his new friend his name, where he lived,
what a good master he had, and that he was practising at the target
every day, for he meant to try and win the burgomaster's prize.

"i shall be sure to find you out at the festival," continued the boy,
"and i will recommend all the people i know to buy sausages of you, for
i've taken a great liking to you."

"so have i to you," replied the old man, shaking the hand that richter
held out to him. "good-bye."

just as hans was saying the last words, robert and his friend came up.

"has that fellow been eating sausages?" asked paul, pointing to hans,
and addressing the old man.

"yes; and a nice, civil-spoken young lad he is."

"smooth-tongued enough, i dare say," sneered paul. "give me three
sausages, and my friend wants three."

the old man was so accustomed to hear rough words that he made no
reply, but busied himself in preparing the sausages, while the boys sat
down and watched him.

"robert, i've a splendid idea just come into my head—how odd that i
never thought of it before! i see how we can pay hans off," said paul.
"i've been worrying and worrying to no purpose, but now i've got it,
and no mistake. when the fireworks are let off, in the darkness we may
thrust a squib which is fired into his hand, and that'll give him such
a dose that he won't be able to shoot at the festival."

"but it will hurt him," answered robert; "and though i want the prize,
i should be ashamed to be such a coward as to injure another to gain my
own end. richter has as good a right to try and win as i have. no, no,
paul; i'm not quite such a bad fellow as that."

"i've no patience with you!" exclaimed paul, angrily. "you may go your
own way, and lose the prize. here come the sausages; let us eat them
while they are hot."

the old man had not been too much engrossed with his cooking to listen
to what paul and robert said. he noted every word that passed, and
resolved to look out for hans and warn him to be careful not to go near
any boys who had squibs, and also to tell him of the conversation he
had overheard. but the customers came so fast that he was too full of
business to carry out his kind intention, for the shades of evening
were falling before the last one was served, and then the fireworks
began, and the old man dared not venture into the crowd which had
gathered at the lower end of the meadow.

when paul found robert so averse to his plan of revenge, he determined
to part company with him, and carry out his scheme alone. so he made
the excuse of wishing to see some particular friends, and promised
to meet him at the station when the fireworks were over. he had been
so accustomed all his life to do just what pleased him best, without
heeding if it were right or wrong, that he gloried in the cleverness of
his plot, only regretting that he had mentioned it to robert.


there was a great concourse of people round the ring from whence the
rockets, wheels, and other pretty devices were let off. and at the same
time, a few boys began letting off squibs, though it had been strictly
forbidden by the authorities.

hans was standing at the edge of the crowd lost in wonder, for he
had never seen such a display before, when he felt something thrust
into his left hand which exploded almost instantaneously, but in the
explosion, he was severely burnt. just at this moment came the grand
finale, which closed the evening's entertainment. and the shouting and
clapping were so noisy that the report of the squib was not noticed,
and it fortunately harmed no one else.

in the first few moments, hans was bewildered, and scarcely realised
what had happened; he was only conscious of sharp pain in his hand.
the crowd dispersed quickly, and he knew the train would start almost
immediately, so he wrapped it in his handkerchief, and, trying to bear
the pain as he best could, walked to the station and jumped into the
first carriage.

his condition excited the attention of his fellow-travellers, and
induced many questions. every one had some particular remedy to
recommend, but poor hans paid little heed to their words. he sat still,
holding his wounded left hand with his right, and suffering too much to
be able to enter into conversation.

at last he reached home, and found his master standing outside the
toll-house awaiting his arrival.

"i've had an accident, sir," he said, trying to speak cheerfully. "i'm
afraid my hand is very much burnt." and then he remembered no more
until he returned to consciousness, and found himself stretched on his
bed, for thither karl schmidt had carried him in a fainting condition.

"you'll soon be better, my boy. you're a brave fellow to come home
alone after such an accident," said his master. "i expect the pain was
too much for you to bear. you have a nasty burn. how did it happen? but
perhaps you had better not tell me until to-morrow, you look so pale.
i've wrapped your hand in cotton wool; let it stay on until you see the
doctor, and be very careful that the air does not get to it."

"i feel quite comfortable now, sir, and able to talk. i wish i could
tell you how it happened. i only know i felt as if some one forced a
squib into my hand which went off directly."

"it must have been a pure accident. i don't think any boy would be
so cruel as to harm another for amusement," remarked karl. "the
authorities ought to punish the rascals who dare to let off squibs. i
know this is not the first time some one has been hurt. you must show
your hand to the doctor early to-morrow morning. i am afraid you will
have no more shooting for many days to come."

"won't it soon be well, sir? i did not think that i should lose the
chance of the prize because of this burn."

"and don't think of it now; but go to sleep, and try to forget you have
been hurt."


next day hans paid an early visit to the doctor, who pronounced that
the hand must be put into a sling, it was so much injured, and would
require care for some weeks.

the boy went slowly home, feeling thoroughly depressed and ill. the
world and his prospects looked very gloomy; he could not work—for how
could he push rafts over the weir with one hand? and perhaps his master
would dismiss him if he did not get well quickly; and last, though not
least, there was the shooting match coming on, and he would be unable
to join in it, and that was a sore disappointment. in the short walk
from the doctor's house to the toll-master's cottage, hans managed to
conjure up all kinds of dismal things: so is it that we often make
troubles before they really exist.

karl was in his mother's room when richter appeared in sight. he called
him from the window to come up, for frau schmidt was anxious to hear
the doctor's opinion.

"you look as if you had all the cares of the world on your shoulders,
hans," he exclaimed, when he saw the boy's face. "what's the matter?"

hans tried to speak in a clear, unconcerned tone, but his voice failed,
and he burst into tears instead.

"come, don't be so downhearted," said karl. "it will only be a matter
of a few weeks; you will not learn idle habits in that time. in fact,
you can work all the same; we shall only change places: you must take
the tolls, and will look after the rafts. why, i used to do both in
former days—levy the duty on the raft, and afterwards help it over the
weir!"

"then you will keep me on, sir, even if my hand is a long time getting
well?"

"certainly. this explains why you look so dismal; you thought i should
turn you away because you could not work. why, hans, i hoped you knew
me better."

"his faith in you has only failed for the moment," said frau schmidt.
"hans feels ill, and his depression of body dims his trust in you. my
dear boy, it is an old, old fault—this want of faith; would that it did
not run through our lives. in your walk home from the doctor's, you
have lost the raft, and in losing the raft you have conjured up doubts
and difficulties which have no foundation."

"mother, mother, you are in a higher world than we are," replied karl.
"poor hans has not reached it, and i am sure i have not; nevertheless,
would that we were as patient and trustful as you are. you see the boy
has another cause of disappointment which you have not thought of,
perhaps: he will be unable to shoot at the match."

"and i lose my lessons from you, sir," added hans, in a doleful voice;
"and i did so enjoy having them every evening."

"i hope they will be renewed some day. my dear boy, i am a stern
teacher when i bid you rouse up to see your mercies, and be thankful
for your many blessings," answered frau schmidt. "are you only going to
stick to the raft when the sun is high and the water smooth? you must
take all your disappointments in life as part of the education which is
to fit you for a higher and better world."

hans smiled through his tears as the invalid spoke. he felt ashamed of
murmuring over his temporary sickness when he contrasted it with her
days, weeks, months, nay, years of continuous suffering. he had only
time to say, "thank you, dear frau, for your advice," for his master
exclaimed, "there are a couple of rafts in sight. we had better go
down, hans; the men are pushing along as if they are in a hurry to pay
toll and pass over the weir. can you take the money?"

"oh yes, sir, quite well," replied the lad, hurrying away after his
master.

                               ————————



chapter vii.

the secret.

after paul had shaken off his companion, he accomplished, as we know,
his cruel purpose, and according to appointment joined robert after
the fireworks were over. he was careful not to run across hans, as he
did not wish to tell his friend what he had done until the following
morning; for paul was sure that he was revenged on hans when he heard
the exclamation of intense pain which escaped him before he had time to
glide away.

"let me see you first thing to-morrow," said paul, when he parted
from robert, just after they had passed the bridge. "i've some work
to finish off, but shall be ready by ten o'clock; i want to tell you
something."

"tell me now."

"i'm afraid there are too many people about. it's a great secret.
to-morrow is time enough. good night."

robert wondered for a few moments what secret paul could have to tell
him, but he forgot all about it when he reached home, for he had to
give an account of his day spent at naumburg to his mother and sisters,
who had not ventured to the fête.

the next morning robert was taking his coffee in the kitchen with the
rest of the family, except his father, who came in before the meal was
ended.

"i've been talking to karl schmidt," he said, "and didn't know it was
so late. did you hear of an accident which happened to young hans last
night?" he asked his son.

"no, father."

"he managed to get his left hand badly burnt by a squib; and what is
very odd about the accident is that he felt the squib was pushed into
his hand, and then it exploded."

robert turned pale, and red. no one was observing him, for all eyes
were fixed on the miller, so he had time to regain his self-possession;
and right glad was he that a customer came to see his father on
business, and he was able to make his escape.

robert was not a bad boy at heart, nor would he ever have injured
another in the cruel manner in which paul had injured hans. he was
appalled at what he had heard, and all that was noble in his character
rose up for the moment in judgment against paul. he walked quickly
away from the mill, and took the back road into the town, nor did he
slacken his pace until he reached herr ebhardt's house. he found his
friend stitching away diligently in a little parlour at the back of his
father's shop.

"you're early, old fellow," said paul, scarcely looking up from
his work, "but i've nearly done, and then we'll go as far as the
hümmel-reich, for i've to take this coat home to a customer who lives
on the way."

"all right; i'll wait outside until you're ready," replied robert.

as he passed into the street again, he found himself face to face
with hans, who was going to the doctor. he looked pale and ill, very
different to the bright lad of the previous day.

robert could not help stopping him, and asking, in a concerned tone,
"is your hand very bad? i heard from my father that you met with an
accident last night."

"it's very bad," answered hans, "dreadfully burnt. good-bye, i'm going
to see the doctor."

robert was thoroughly unhinged; though he was really innocent, he felt
in some degree guilty, and he was glad when paul joined him, for he
was most anxious to hear his secret, and was sure that it had some
connection with the accident that had befallen hans.

"now for your secret," he said to paul.

"wait a bit; let's get up the hümmel-reich."

"it will take us a good half-hour to walk there, and i want to hear
what you've got to say," urged robert, impatiently.

"gently, old fellow; we've plenty of time before us. it's a jolly
morning for an outing. let us get rid of the coat, and then we'll enjoy
ourselves. you will be right glad to hear what i've got to tell you."

"i know what it is before you speak, and i call it a wicked shame of
you to hurt a fellow as you've hurt hans. i've a great mind to tell of
you, that i have!" burst out robert.

the boys were out of the village and walking through a field when he
spoke thus angrily.

"what do you mean?" asked paul, scowling at his companion.

"why, i mean that i've a great mind to tell every one in kösen that it
was you who put the squib into the hand of poor hans, and that you did
it out of revenge."

there was something so resolute in robert's face, and so different from
the idle, careless expression it usually wore, that paul felt a little
afraid, for he was a coward at heart.

"oh, robert, how can you be so unkind! it was all for you i did it; and
now you find fault with me." and his voice trembled as if he were about
to cry.

"it wasn't all for me, and you know that, paul; you hate hans, and you
made up your mind to pay him off after he tripped you up. but you've
gone too far this time, and what's more, i think you've put me in such
a corner that i can't shoot for the prize this year."

"not shoot, robert!" answered paul, standing still in his astonishment.
"you don't mean what you say. why, i've made it an easy matter for you.
now, old fellow, shake hands, and tell me you're glad i got rid of your
rival thus. he would certainly have come off conqueror, so you must
thank me, for i'm a true friend to you. and, really, if i hadn't been
so fond of you, i shouldn't have interfered, but suffered hans to win."

"i'm not so sure he would have won; and i declare i'd rather he had
beaten than see him look so ill."

"when did you see him?"

"a few minutes ago; he was on his way to the doctor's."

"then he is really hurt?"

"how can you ask me that question? you know he is, paul. it was nothing
but revenge that made you push the squib into his hand; i see it in
your face, you look so spiteful."

"what's come to you to-day, robert? i tell you what it is, you may try
me too far. you're my friend, and i'm your friend, but i can't stand
being preached at. now, let's forget this little difference; what is
done can't be undone. and, remember, if i have acted unkindly to hans,
it was all for you, so don't blame me. i'll just run in, and leave this
coat at yonder house, and then we'll go on to the hümmel-reich, as we
are so near, and be jolly for the rest of the way."

this pretty spot derives its name from the great beauty of its
situation. it merely consists of a little hotel built on a flat
hill-top, which commands the valley of the saale at a point where the
river makes a bend in the shape of a horse-shoe. on the opposite side
are the ruins of two old castles, the rudolsburg and the saalech;
while, as far as the eye can reach, little villages with their quaint
old churches lie nestling among the trees of this highly-cultivated
valley, and thus add to the picturesqueness of the scene.

robert was not convinced, but he nevertheless accompanied paul on to
the hümmel-reich, which was not thronged with visitors so early in the
day. the friends spent a couple of hours pleasantly, for there was a
target so that robert was able to practise for the festival, and paul
stood by and praised him. they only left off in time to reach home by
one o'clock, and, as paul was going out with his father, they parted at
herr ebhardt's door, and made no plans for the evening.

"ain't we just as good friends as ever?" paul asked robert, as they
entered the village.

"oh yes," he replied.

but though robert answered paul in the affirmative, he was oppressed
and out of spirit, and could not resist taking a stroll in the
direction of the toll-house after dinner; he had no definite object in
view beyond a sort of restless feeling to see hans.

the latter was sitting outside the door with a book on his knee,
looking very pale, and with his left arm in a sling. he was so absorbed
in the contents of his volume that he started when robert addressed him
in these words: "i'm so sorry you're hurt. i am alone this afternoon,
and thought i would come and see if i could do anything for you."

hans was very much surprised, but robert seemed so thoroughly in
earnest that he answered: "thank you; no one can help me bear the pain,
but it is very kind of you to think of me. my master does not mind my
being idle until i am better. it would be much worse if i were thrown
out of my place."

"what are you reading out of? you seem to have got a queer old book
there," asked robert, by way of continuing the conversation.

"queer outside, perhaps," replied hans, "but the inside is all gold."

"let me see it."

hans opened his father's old bible.

"why, it's a bible!" exclaimed robert, in a tone of disappointment. "i
thought it was something very particular."

"so it is," answered hans; "if you will sit down, i will read you a few
verses that are worth more than thousands of sovereigns."

at another time robert would have laughed, and jeered, and perhaps run
away, but he was softened towards hans, and wanted to show him some
attention, so he quietly sat down on the door-step by his side.

hans felt sure his master would not be angry at his speaking to robert
when he told him that he had an opportunity of bidding him stick to
the raft; so he turned over the pages of his bible to find a suitable
passage to read, and in that moment he asked god to help him for
christ's sake to say something to robert that would make him think.

"i declare it is difficult to settle what to read to you, there are
so many beautiful things in this book; but, of course, you know your
bible?" said hans.

"i can't say i'm much up to it," replied his companion.

"but you read it, or hear it read, every day, don't you?"

"no, i don't; please go on where you were reading when i came up."

"i had just got to these words: 'a new commandment i give unto you,
that ye love one another; as i have loved you, that ye also love one
another.' i will read the chapter through."

"you read splendidly," said robert, at its conclusion. "where did you
learn?"

"in our village, and in the forest. my mother was a very good scholar,
and i'm so fond of learning. my master gives me lessons every evening.
are not those grand words, 'a new commandment i give unto you, that ye
love one another'? oddly enough, you were in my thoughts when i first
read them—i mean just before you spoke to me."

"i! how?"

"i will tell you. i have been practising hard at the target, and meant
to try for the burgomaster's prize, which you have won for the last two
years. my master said that you had no rival to fear in kösen, and that
the burgomaster wished to find another who would compete with you; for
though many boys usually entered their names on the list, it was only
for the pleasure of being mixed up with the fête, but with no chance
of success. my master found i had a steady hand and a correct eye, so
he lent me his bow and arrows, and i have been practising regularly
with him every evening; and i think i had a fair chance of winning the
prize. but this morning the doctor said that i should be unable to use
my hand for at least three weeks, and, as you know, the schutzen fest
comes off in eight days. i was very jealous of you this morning, and
inclined to murmur and rebel because i could not use my hand. but,
thank god, the feeling is passing away, for it came into my mind that
if i were to encourage it, i should break christ's new commandment, and
shut out love, for love and jealousy cannot live together; and, robert,
i had rather stick to the raft than win the prize."

robert looked his astonishment, and hans explained his meaning, and
added: "christ gave himself for us—that was his love; and he asks us in
return to give ourselves to him. will you give yourself to him? i shall
bear my pain and disappointment without murmuring if any words which
i have read out of god's book make you think about him, for i shall
remember that you would not have spoken to me if you had not been sorry
for my accident, and that it was because you knew i was in pain that
you took the trouble to come here to see me."

robert could scarcely bear these words, they made him inclined to tell
hans the whole truth, but the fear of paul kept him silent, and right
glad was he to see karl schmidt walking towards them.

"your master is coming," he said; "i had better be off. i know he will
not care to see me here, so good-bye. i dare say i shall come again
soon to hear how you are getting on."

and robert walked away in a more thoughtful mood than usual. there was
something so manly and noble about hans. he was so different to his
chosen friend paul. he felt a few pricks of conscience too when he
recalled the words which hans had spoken about the burgomaster's prize.

"i wish paul hadn't interfered," he muttered, "that i do, with all my
heart. i would rather have been beaten fairly than win and carry about
the secret knowledge that if it hadn't been for ebhardt's cowardly
behaviour to hans, we should have tried our luck together. and to think
of his saying that he didn't mind the pain if it made me stick to the
raft; that beat's all."

                               ————————



chapter viii.

the schutzen fest.

robert could not shake off the impression which hans had produced upon
him, and he did not awake in a very good humour with himself next
morning. when he met paul, he entered at once upon the subject which
engrossed his thoughts, and ended by saying: "i've almost made up my
mind not to shoot. i feel as if i were a great rascal to stand up
before the people of kösen and carry away the prize, knowing what i do."

paul was very angry. "i tell you what it is, robert," he replied, "i've
had enough of this sort of thing. if you don't shoot, i declare i'll
go to hans and tell him you pushed the squib into his hand because you
didn't want him to shoot against you."

"you dare not, paul. but if you were to be so wicked, it would be easy
for me to tell the truth about you."

"one against the other, my boy. my word is as good as yours; we are
known as close friends in kösen. but now, robert, don't be stupid; i
shall be all right if you will just shoot for the prize, and win it,
and that will make an end of the matter. and to show you that i am
sorry i have vexed you, i promise i will never tease hans again. don't
let us fall out; we are old chums, and kösen boys, and it wouldn't
sound well if we were to give evidence against one another; nor would
your parents, or even mine, care to have this affair made a matter of
talk in the town."

robert was afraid to refuse paul's terms; and so he tried to forget
that hans had been ill-used, nor did he call on him again before the
schutzen fest. paul felt secretly thankful he had constrained his
friend to keep silence; for, bad as he was, he did not relish the
affair being sifted, so certain was he that if the truth were made
public, even he would feel uncomfortable and cowed by the black looks
which he knew his companions and acquaintances would cast upon him. his
fear was for himself; he was not ashamed of his sin.

the market-place in kösen consists of a clump of green trees which
stand in the high street, and this was the meeting-place of those who
competed for the burgomaster's prize.

kösen put on its gayest appearance for the fête; the day was exquisite,
the sky blue, and the air still; flags were flying in all directions,
and parents and children appeared in their holiday attire.

the shooting began at four o'clock. long before that hour, there was
quite a crowd in the market-place waiting for the band to come and
strike up the national air, which was a signal for the twenty boys who
competed for the prize to form themselves into a double column. each of
the boys carried his own bow and arrows and wore a scarlet cap wreathed
with oak-leaves.

the marker led the way, dressed in a scarlet tunic, white trousers, and
a cap with a plume of many colours; the band came next, then banners
carried by boys, and lastly the twenty competitors for the prize. in
this order they proceeded to the burgomaster's house. he was awaiting
their arrival arrayed in his robes of office; and now he took the lead,
and marched away in the direction of the bridge. instead of crossing
it, the procession turned off to the right, passed the mill, and
onwards until it reached the katze—a pretty, elevated spot covered with
green trees, with the saale running a few feet below. here many chairs
and tables were ranged; and there were temporary tents erected where
refreshments could be had, for most of the company remained to supper
after the shooting was over.

every one of the twenty competitors shot twelve arrows, and if the
bull's-eye were hit, the marker signified the fact by dancing in front
of the target, flag in hand, while at the same moment a gun fired.

robert was quite himself; the excitement of the scene made him forget
everything but his own enjoyment and importance. he did not meet hans
on the way, so he had nothing to damp his pleasure.

paul was as close to his friend as the rules permitted, for only those
who competed for the prize were allowed to enter the ring.

the boys shot better than on the previous year, but robert shot the
best, and so to him the prize was awarded. he had to come before the
burgomaster, who complimented him on his skill, and crowned him with a
wreath of laurel-leaves. afterwards, he presented a drinking-cup to him
mounted in silver.

[illustration: robert wins the prize.]

when this ceremony was concluded, the burgomaster returned home, and
robert became the hero of the evening. at ten o'clock the band left the
orchestra in order to conduct him home, and a large concourse of young
friends and acquaintances accompanied him, lighting the way with their
many coloured lanterns, and shouting, "hoch, hoch" (hurrah).

the music ceased when the mill was reached, and amid renewed shouts
robert entered his father's house, and the rest of his friends
dispersed to their several homes, save paul, for robert could not spare
him. he wanted to chat over the events of the day with his friend, and
to express his surprise at not seeing hans richter.

but even paul bade him "good night" as soon as he found there was
company in the kitchen, for he did not care to face kind pastor hahn
who was chatting with the miller and his wife. when he caught sight of
him through the open door, he whispered to robert: "good night, old
fellow. i shall slip off, for i don't care to have a lecture from the
minister to-night. come to me in the morning."

"all hail to the conqueror!" exclaimed the pastor, as robert entered
the kitchen.

"you shot well, my boy," said his father, "better than usual, i
thought."

"and you had an easy victory," added pastor hahn; "you had no
competitor. i think you would have found your match if hans richter
had been able to try his skill. poor fellow! i have been so sorry for
him; he set his heart on shooting for the prize. at the same time, i
must say i never saw a lad take his disappointment so well. ah, robert,
would that you had the same strong principle to guide you, that hans
has. it is such a mystery how that lad met with his accident. i confess
from his account it seems to me as if some one had thrust the squib
into his hand out of sheer mischief, or even revenge, and—"

"hold up your cup, robert," called out the miller; "you will drop your
prize. my boy, you are tired out, you look deadly pale. now your colour
is returning: i thought you were going to faint. get your supper, and
go to bed at once."

"i've had enough to eat, thank you, father," answered robert, "but i
will go to bed, for i am very tired, so good night all. good night,
pastor hahn."

"good night," said the pastor, taking the hand robert stretched out to
him, and holding it in his own. "you have won an earthly prize to-day;
how i wish you would be as eager in striving to win a heavenly prize.
god has given us many prizes, but the greatest and best is his son, and
i fear you despise this prize. the day will come when your father in
heaven will ask why you have neglected your saviour; what answer will
you give then?"

"the lad is too tired to think to-night, good pastor," said the miller;
"don't damp his pleasure by a long sermon."

"it seems to me as if it were never the right moment to speak to you
of those things which make for our everlasting salvation," answered
the pastor, sadly: for he was rarely permitted to enlarge on the theme
he loved so well within those walls. and yet he did not cease his
visits, hoping that the seed he dropped from time to time would, by the
spirit's blessing, bear fruit at last.

robert went to bed, but not to sleep. now that the excitement was over,
and paul away from him, he began to be uncomfortable again. he would
willingly have relinquished his prize if he could have undone the cruel
injury which paul had inflicted on hans. he tossed about his bed,
wondering why he could not sleep, for he never remembered lying awake
for five minutes before. but turn as he might, he got no real rest, for
if he fell asleep, he dreamed of terrible things and was thankful to
awake and find them unreal. he was very glad to see morning dawn, and
watch the sun rise, for he did not feel quite so miserable as during
the long hours of the night.


hans was not present at the schutzen fest, for a very good reason.
he and his master had fully determined to go, but at the last moment
several rafts came along, and the men were anxious to pay duty on their
wood and start forward at once. as soon as they had been attended to,
another delay came: a friend from naumburg called to see karl; so, as
his master was engaged, hans went quietly upstairs to chat with frau
schmidt.

"not gone!" she said, when he entered her room. "surely, dear boy, you
are not smarting so much under your disappointment that you cannot see
another win!"

"no, dear frau, but we've been so busy, and now my master's engaged,
and i feel very tired. there is really no other reason why i do not go.
i could see robert win, and not be one bit jealous of him. i have had a
battle to fight, nevertheless," he added, smiling, "so don't think me
better than i am. it's sticking to the raft, dear frau, that enabled me
to think quietly of robert's currying off a prize that might have been
mine. i seem to understand better since this struggle has passed away
how easily those who have no raft to cling to may commit any sin to
gain their ends."

"you are quite right, hans; had you encouraged the feeling of jealousy,
it might have grown so fast that it would have mastered you at last.
christ's new commandment carried out into daily life is the best cure
for the indulgence of sin."

"there is an old man coming to the fest to-day," hans said, after
a pause, "in whom i am much interested; he is such a fine, manly
christian, and yet so poor. i cannot forget my talk with him, though i
have never told you about it." and hans gave frau schmidt an account of
his conversation with the old man who sold sausages, adding, "i must
try and find him out to-morrow; he told me he intended to spend a few
days at kösen."

"there is a sort of freemasonry between christians," answered frau
schmidt. "i hope you may find him; i should like to see him if i am
tolerably well."

hans little thought when he spoke about the old man how much he was
engrossing the thoughts of the latter. among the spectators who
watched the shooting was franz nieper, the seller of sausages. he
arranged his apparatus some little distance from the ring, but in a
good position for trade. and when the attention of all was directed
to the competitors for the burgomaster's prize, he also joined the
crowd and watched the progress of the match. he recognised one face
inside the ring, and one just without. he would have known robert and
paul anywhere; their countenances were impressed on his memory. he
looked about in vain for another face he expected to see—a pleasant
one, which had smiled on him, and given him cheery words. but though
he looked again and again at the twenty boys wearing scarlet caps, he
could not find it. at length he ventured to make a remark to a pretty,
bright-looking girl who stood beside him looking on:

"i thought the lad who lives with the toll-master was going to try his
luck," he said.

"so he was," replied the maiden, who happened to be one of the miller's
daughters, "but he has had an accident and burnt his hand."

"how did it happen?"

"he was at the cherry feast at naumburg, and some of the rough boys
of the town began letting off squibs, though it is forbidden by the
authorities. and in some way, i don't know how, hans richter got hold
of a squib, which went off in his hand and hurt him dreadfully. he's
getting better now, but is not well enough to shoot."

"who's likely to win the day?"

"i don't know for certain, but i think my brother, for he's the best
shot in kösen. they do say that if hans had been able to shoot, robert
might have lost the prize."

"where is your brother robert?"

"there, standing close to that large tree," replied the girl, pointing
to one of the faces franz had recognised.

"and the boy talking to him, who is he?"

"that's paul ebhardt, his greatest friend."

"where do you live?"

"at the mill."

"and where does paul ebhardt live?"

"in the town; his father is a master tailor. but why do you ask so many
questions, do you want any help? you look so very old, and seem very
poor."

"yes, young girl, i am both old and poor," replied franz, "but i don't
require help, for my master never forgets me, and he can send me all
the help i want. thank you for answering my questions." and the old man
turned away.

he walked slowly back to his wooden table, and attended to his fire,
muttering, "poor lad, poor lad, i'm so sorry for him! i wish i'd left
my sausages and found him. well, well, it can't be helped now, but old
franz must try and set wrong right."

he seated himself on his wooden stool, nor did he rise when a great
noise of shouting announced that the prize was won. he made no comment
when he heard robert klein was the victor, he merely stamped on the
ground impatiently, and then he seemed to remember that such a feeling
was wrong, for he said aloud: "that won't do, franz; that's not the way
to set wrong right; be a christian, and just do the master's work, and
copy him. did he ever grow impatient?"

when customers came, the old man was calm as before, and served
them with the care he generally exercised. but all the time, he was
thinking, and the results of his meditations were comprised in these
words, which fell from his lips before he lay down upon a heap of straw
in an out-house: "to-morrow morning, the first thing you do, franz,
must be to go to the toll-house and ask to see the toll-master."

                               ————————



chapter ix.

wrong set right.

the next morning, hans started off early to make some purchases in the
town, and find out if the old man who sold sausages had arrived on the
previous day. he had been absent more than an hour when franz nieper
reached the toll-keeper's house.

"is hans richter at home?" he asked of karl schmidt, who was sitting in
the parlour making up his books.

"no; he is gone over to the town. i expect him back every minute; in
fact, i can't think why he is so long away. do you want him?"

"i presume my business is with you as much as with him," answered
franz. "did he tell you he bought sausages at naumburg of an old man?"

"yes, to be sure he did; and one of his errands this morning is to try
and find him, for he expects he came to kösen yesterday."

"i am that old man. i want to greet the lad once more; and i have
something important to say to him, and to you too, for i suppose i'm
speaking to the toll-master."

"yes, i am karl schmidt, but i do not quite understand what you have of
importance to say to me, seeing we are strangers to one another, and
hans only knows you because he bought your sausages and had a chat with
you while he ate them."

"i wish to set wrong right, master," replied old franz, emphatically.
"the lad has been cruelly wronged."

"how?" asked karl, feeling and looking sorely puzzled.

"it's a long story, master, and i am an old man. i can only tell it my
own way. will you listen to all i have to say?"

"certainly i will. sit down, my friend, for you look tired, and don't
hurry yourself."

old franz took the chair that karl offered him, and began his story by
speaking first of his interview with hans, and how much he liked the
boy. then he repeated the substance of the conversation which passed
between paul and robert, and alluded to his own determination of trying
to find hans out in order to tell him to take care of himself; and how
his customers came and prevented him from carrying out his intention.
he further spoke of missing hans among the twenty boys with scarlet
caps on the previous day, and that he made inquiry of the miller's
daughter, and learnt the sad truth.

"it needs no words of mine to tell you," he said, in conclusion, "how
that lad met with his accident, and i really think the boy, or boys,
who had to do with it ought to be punished, or some one else will be
served in like manner."

karl was extremely angry. "i thought paul was a very bad fellow," he
replied, "but scarcely so bad as this proves him to be. i wonder if
robert was persuaded to be a party to the cowardly action, or whether
he maintained his refusal. at any rate, he knew when hans was hurt that
it was no accident, but foul play, and certainly he should have refused
to accept the burgomaster's prize; an honourable boy would have quietly
withdrawn from the contest. i scarcely know how to move in this matter."

"try and set the wrong right, master," reiterated old franz. "the prize
is given now, so i suppose it can't be taken away, but the miller's son
has not won it fairly."

"no; for i am almost sure hans would have come off conqueror had he
been able to take his place. the grave question to be settled now is,
how to prove that paul deliberately thrust the squib into richter's
hand. but here comes hans; he is the one who has the best right to
decide what steps we should take. let us consult with him."

"i'm so glad to see you once more!" exclaimed the boy, shaking old
franz warmly by the hand. "i've just come from the town, and i looked
about for you everywhere. i was sorry to miss seeing you yesterday.
i have had an accident, and that prevented me from shooting, but i'm
getting better, and i hope very soon to be able to use my hand again
and do all my work."

"your old friend came to see me about your so-called accident," said
karl. "i think we have found out how it happened."

"yes, young lad. i ought to have saved you from it, but my customers
came so quickly i could not leave them to find you. i overheard the
tailor's son propose to the miller's boy that you should have a fired
squib pushed into your hand. i must give credit where credit is due,
and say that the miller's boy was up in arms when his friend proposed
this; but one or both of them did the deed, or your hand would not have
been hurt."

"paul fired the squib, and thrust it into my hand," answered hans,
quietly; "robert had nothing to do with it."

"how do you know this?" asked karl.

"because i left robert half-an-hour ago, and he gave me a full account
of the whole thing."

"robert told you all about it!" exclaimed karl. "i wonder he was not
too ashamed for that."

"it is because he is so repentant, master; and he has promised me to
give up paul's friendship and turn over a new leaf."

"he has promised that a hundred times before," said karl.

"but i believe he is in earnest this time. i am sure if he will keep
away from paul's influence, he will be a better fellow."

"still, i fear it is all talk with him; he is not to be trusted."

"let us try him once more, master."

"but what did he say to you?"

"i should like to tell you, if you will agree not to let his confession
go further until we have decided what it is best to do," said hans,
looking first at karl schmidt, and then at the old man.

"certainly, i will keep my counsel," replied his master.

"and so will i; indeed, i only want to set wrong right, my boy. and if
you, who are injured, are satisfied, i ought to be," remarked franz.

"i crossed the river in your boat, master," said hans, smiling at the
old man, "and went directly to the mill to order the flour. as i came
out, i met robert, so i stopped and asked him how he enjoyed himself
yesterday, and i congratulated him on winning the prize, adding, 'i
was not miserable about it, for i lived down my first feelings of
vexation; they were nearly gone when you came to see me the day after
my accident, so i was able to be glad that the sun shone, and it was so
still and bright.' to my astonishment, robert burst out:

"'oh, hans, don't talk to me like that; i'm the most unhappy fellow
living.'

"'what's the matter?' i asked. and seeing that he looked ready to cry,
i said, 'come along with me and have a talk.'

"so we walked by the side of the river until we found a nook where we
could sit down and be quite out of the way of any one who chanced to
pass by.

"'now, tell me why you are unhappy,' i asked, 'for i must confess you
look wretched and ill; let me be your friend.'

"when i said this, he gave a great sob, and then he began to laugh, and
then he cried, and it was some time before i could get him to speak
out. at last he told me what it was that weighed on his mind. he said
that paul ebhardt had disliked me from the very first time he saw me,
but since the day we had quarrelled by the river-side, he had hated me,
and watched for an opportunity of paying me off. then he spoke of the
conversation that my old friend there overheard, and he assured me he
had no idea paul would carry out his cruel purpose.

"'i give you my word,' he continued, 'that, careless as i am, i should
never have been such a dastard as to hurt you. i have been wretched
ever since i heard that you were injured. i went home miserable after
you had spoken to me about sticking to the raft, and had read to me
out of the bible. the next morning i fell out with paul about you, but
we made it up again, and i tried to forget you, because i was afraid
of him. but last night i could not sleep for thinking, so i made up my
mind to tell you all about it, and i want you to show that you forgive
me by taking the prize i won yesterday.'

"'i am glad you have told me this, but i don't want your prize,' i
answered. 'you may be happy again, robert, for i forgive you entirely,
though i scarcely know what i have to forgive; and, now, will you do me
a very great favour?'

"'what is it?' he asked 'i will do anything to prove to you that i
would not have had you injured; and if only you would take my prize, i
should think we were quits.'

"'i don't want to be quits with you in that manner,' i replied; 'we
shall be quits, and true friends, if you will "stick to the raft," for
then you will learn to love good company, and work, and study. oh, will
you come to jesus?'

"'i wish i could, if it would make me as happy as you are, hans,' he
answered; 'but i am bound to paul, for i am afraid of him. i hardly
dare think how angry he will be with me when he learns what i have
done.'

"'avoid him for the present, or at least until i have consulted my
master,' i said. 'will you begin a new life at once by asking your
father to give you work at the mill, and will you pray to god, robert,
to help you?'

"'i never prayed in my life, hans,' he replied.

"'then begin at once, to-day,' i urged. 'there will be no real change
in you unless you change towards god. he says to you, "my son, give me
thine heart." oh! do not withhold it from him.'

"we parted then. robert went to the mill, and i made my way to the
village. and all the way, i've been thinking how it will be best to
act; and really, master, if you do not object, i should like to go and
see paul and try and win him over."

"well done, my boy!" exclaimed franz nieper. "that's the way to set
wrong right; and depend upon it, you are showing the same mercy to paul
that god shows to us. you have hit the nail on the head. it's the raft
that has done this; it is your faith and trust in your saviour, and
clinging fast to his teaching, that enables you to love your enemy."

"yes, hans," remarked his master, "you have found the best way of
taking your revenge on paul. but whether he will receive your advances
cordially and be sorry for what he has done, is more than i can tell.
at any rate, i wish you god speed on your errand. go to him at once, my
boy—that is, if you are not too tired—for it is better for you to see
him before he meets robert. but remember, if you come back and tell me
that paul has refused to hear you, and added insult to injury, i must
act for you."

"i'll accompany you as far as the village," said franz nieper, "for i
ought not to lose a day's trade."

"you must have something to eat first, and then see my mother,"
exclaimed schmidt, adding, "she will like to thank you for coming here
when i tell her why you paid us a visit."

so franz nieper remained at the toll-house, and hans richter went alone
to the master tailor's house in search of paul.



chapter x.

the interview.

paul wondered why robert did not come, and he was on the point of going
in search of his friend when he saw hans standing in the doorway of his
father's shop. his was the last face in the world he wished to see,
and to have him there boded no good. paul would have liked to make his
escape, but he could not do this very well, for hans came up close to
him and said, "i want to speak to you."

"what do you want? what have you to say to me?" he stammered out.

"a great deal. let us go into some room where we can talk quietly."

"there's no place in this house. father has only gone on an errand into
the village. he will be back in a few minutes, and then he'll want
the parlour for his work. people may come in here at any moment to
give orders, so i can't say that we shall be quite alone. but i'm sure
mother doesn't want us upstairs, so if you have anything to say, you
must say it at once, and take the chance of being interrupted."

"let us go into the fields, or by the river-side beyond the town. i
don't mind where we go, so that i can talk to you quietly."

"i suppose you want to fight me again. no, i'm not going into the
fields or anywhere with you."

"i mean to speak to you, paul," said hans, firmly. "and if you will not
give me an opportunity of saying what i have to say to you alone, why,
you must listen to it in your father's shop, and it's not my fault if
any one overhears our conversation."

paul began to quake. he felt sure that richter had something important
to communicate, for he showed it in his determined manner. but as he
would not appear to be afraid, he exclaimed, in a loud, coarse voice,
"i can't think what you want with me; i hate you, and you hate me, so
the less we have to say to one another the better."

hans touched his arm, and replied, "this hurt of mine was no accident;
the squib was pushed into my hand deliberately. you know the name of
the boy who did it, and so do i. let me have a quiet talk with you. if
you refuse me, my master will be very angry, and i fear he will tell
your father. i am sure it is better for us to be friends than enemies.
but if you won't hear me, and persist in treating me so rudely, i shall
have to go back home, and i don't know what turn matters will take."

"let your master come to my father and talk to him, if he likes; i
don't care. if robert has been telling lies of me, he shall be well
paid off for it, that he shall! i suppose you mean me to understand
that i hurt your hand?"

"yes, you did. but oh, paul, i really am not here to blame you, but
to forgive you. don't go on being so wicked, but do remember you must
stand before god one day, and answer to him if you persist in living in
sin. stop before it is too late, and give up your bad habits, and try
and live a nobler life."

"what stuff you are talking! just leave off preaching, and give up the
name of the fellow who told you i hurt your hand. do you know i will
make you answer for accusing me falsely, for neither you nor any one
else can prove that i did it! name the fellow, i say."

"i shall not," answered hans.

"because you dare not. but, just to show you how wrong you are in
suspecting me, i will tell you who did the deed. robert hurt you
because he was afraid you would win the prize away from him."

"robert did not hurt me, and did not know that you intended to carry
out your wicked thought; when you proposed to injure me, he refused to
be a party to such a cowardly act."

"robert has told of me," said paul, forgetting in his passion that he
betrayed the truth and confessed his guilt. "he shall smart for this,
he shall rue the day that he turned tell-tale. and as for you, i detest
you. i can't think of any name to call you which is bad enough to show
how much i hate you. go and tell everybody in kösen that i hurt you for
the purpose; i don't care. i only wish your hand had been blown off, or
so bad that you could not use it again."

what more paul would have added, it is hard to say. he stopped
suddenly, for he saw his father. herr ebhardt had listened to nearly
all the conversation between his son and hans. he had entered the
parlour by the back of the house, and hearing voices in the shop had
opened the door softly, and thus overheard what passed. he now came
forward, and asked hans, "what is all this ado about? tell me of what
you accuse my son."

"i had much rather have spoken to paul alone," answered hans,
respectfully. "i came to him in the spirit of love, and hoped he would
have received me more kindly."

"the spirit of love!" echoed the master tailor, scornfully. "none of
that cant here, please. what has my son done to you? it sounded to me
very much as if he had hurt your hand on purpose. is that what you
accuse him of? answer me at once, yes or no."

"yes," said hans.

"and you are guilty, paul. i know it by the last words i heard you
speak; your passion got the better of you, young gentleman. you shall
be well punished for this. and you, young fellow, had better go home,
and if you meet any acquaintances by the way, and ask for their pity by
telling them how badly you have been treated, say to them that ebhardt,
the master tailor of kösen, condemns his son for committing such a
cowardly act as to stab you in the dark. i go in for fair play, and not
foul play. will it satisfy you to know that that boy of mine has had
his reward in the shape of a punishment he will remember as long as he
lives?"

"no, it will not, herr ebhardt," answered hans, boldly. "i did not come
here to provoke you to be hard upon your son. i came to forgive him,
and i ask you to unsay what you have said. i do not wish him to be
punished and, what is more, if i can help it, he shall go free."

"how can you help it?"

"not by force, because you are stronger than either paul or i; and
you can thrash us both if you like. but will you hear me out without
sneering at me?"

"yes; speak up, lad. i don't think you are quite such a sneak as i took
you for at first."

"i came here to forgive paul, because i am a follower of the lord jesus
christ, and as he forgave his enemies, so i wish to forgive mine. if
i forgive him of my own free will, i don't think you need punish him.
but there is one thing i will ask you to obtain for me, that is, his
promise not to abuse robert klein, nor fight him, nor serve him out in
any way."

paul had stood by in sullen silence, and now his father turned to him,
and said, "do you hear what hans asks? give me your word that you will
not touch robert, and i will let you go free."

there was only one person in the world whom paul feared, that was his
father, and he had good reason to be afraid of him. he was a powerful
man with a violent temper, who was very often partially intoxicated,
and then he cared for no one, but dealt out his blows freely on whoever
ventured to contradict or offend him.

"i will promise not to touch robert, father," answered paul, in a
very different way to what he had spoken when addressing hans. he was
so glad to escape punishment that he would have pledged his word to
anything that was required of him.

"and mind," added his father, "you will keep your promise this time, or
my name is not ebhardt. do you hear me, sir?"

"yes, i do," whimpered paul.

"and now i hope you are satisfied. i wish you good morning," said the
master tailor, waving his hand as if to dismiss his visitor.

so hans was obliged to leave the shop, for he was afraid to make
another effort to soften paul's heart, lest his father should grow
impatient and visit his anger on his son in a summary manner.

he was glad to reach home without meeting any of his acquaintances, for
he was in no mood to indulge in every-day chat. he was chafed in spirit
and disappointed at the rebuff he had received at the hands of paul,
and also annoyed at the rough manner in which he had been addressed by
the master tailor.

old franz had not left the toll-keeper's cottage. he had just come
downstairs after seeing frau schmidt.

"well, what success have you had?" asked karl.

"poor enough," answered hans, sighing. "oh, master, i had such a
beautiful plan in my head. paul was to be so sorry, he was to turn over
a new leaf and promise to reform, but it has all gone to the winds. i
have gained nothing by my visit to him, except a promise that he will
not fight robert." and hans gave an account of his interview with herr
ebhardt and paul.

"well, well, you've done all you could; you've tried to carry out the
master's new commandment," said old franz. "you can't make him sorry,
you can't change his heart, my boy, but there is one who can. while
there is life there is hope; so hope on, and pray that something will
happen that will induce the lad to arise and go to his father and say,
'i have sinned against heaven, and before thee.'"

"and in the meantime let robert be your care," added karl; "for if he
will no longer idle his time away, i do not mind his coming here. there
seems better material to work upon in him, and you may be sure that he
and paul will never be friends again. the master tailor will take care
of that. depend upon it, this affair will be known in kösen; indeed, it
ought to be, and i think i should do well if i went to the burgomaster,
for he is certain to hear a garbled account from some one."

"no, no, sir; please don't do that. let it rest now," said richter. "my
hand will be quite well in another week, and then the affair will die
out. i shall be so sorry to keep up ill-will between paul and robert."

"then you do not wish me to go and see herr ebhardt?"

"no, no, sir; it will only make paul hate me the more; and i do want to
win him over to be my friend at last."

"i don't think you will do that, but at any rate, the less said the
soonest mended. i think you have right on your side," replied karl.
"but you must be prepared to hear more about it, for the miller is not
a man to keep a secret, and he is sure to be told all the facts of the
case by robert. must you go?" he added, addressing franz nieper, who
made a movement towards the door.

"yes, i have to say good-bye. i leave kösen first thing to-morrow.
there is a great fair in halle soon, and as the weather is warm, i
mean to take my time and move along slowly, for i did a good trade
yesterday. i intended to stay longer, but somehow i feel unhinged, and
more inclined to push on than to linger here."

"good-bye," said hans; "i hope we shall meet again one of these days."

"if we don't meet here, we shall meet yonder," replied the old man,
pointing up to the blue sky, "for we all three have our faces turned
in one direction. may it be our greatest joy so long as god spares
our lives to do as yon man is doing who is just coming in sight—you
see i have not forgotten our first conversation—'stick to the raft.'
farewell."

                               ————————



chapter xi.

the pool of bethesda.

robert went directly to his father after he left hans. the miller was
writing a letter in his counting-house; he looked up with a troubled
expression on his face when he saw his son enter, for robert rarely
came there unless he wanted to borrow or beg money, or to tell him of
some mischief he had done.

"what is the matter now?" he said, impatiently.

"i am come to ask you to give me some work to do," stammered out
robert. "father, i know you will say that i only bring you into
trouble, and lose the business if i have anything to do with it, but i
really am in earnest this time. i will tell you why." and the boy gave
a detailed account of all that had occurred.

"hans richter is a noble fellow," exclaimed the miller. "i liked that
boy from the first: he has a fine face, and looks as if he could not do
a mean trick. and if he makes you a better lad, robert, i shall indeed
owe him a debt of gratitude."

"i think i've got hold of the secret of his goodness. father, i'm
beginning to believe there is something true in religion, and that it
is because hans loves god he is such a noble fellow. i mean to try and
see if i can follow his example, and serve my god, too. why should we
not all turn over a new leaf, and go and hear pastor hahn preach on
sunday?"

"i can't quite do that, my boy, for i'm satisfied with the life i lead,
and i don't care to be made gloomy by too much religion. i often think
pastor hahn calls me to account without good reason, for i harm no one,
pay my debts, don't drink, and am a good husband and father."

"i fancy hans would say that was not enough; he told me the other day
that i must give myself to christ, and cling to him as the men do to
the raft when it shoots the weir, for that christ died on the cross to
save us from our sins. but i can't remember all he said, for i know so
little about these things. i will soon know more, though, for hans will
teach me; and i mean to go with him to pastor hahn's bible-class. i do
very much wish i had read my bible before this."

the miller felt uncomfortable; he could not but remember that if he had
been a god-fearing man, the bible would have been an honoured book. as
it was, neither he nor his wife nor his children cared for its sacred
pages.

"i'm not going to stop you from going to the bible-class, or church,"
he answered, hurriedly; "you may do just as you like. and now tell me,
robert," he added, more quietly, "are you really anxious to give up
your idle habits, and work?"

"yes, father. i dare say it will be hard at first, but you must bear
with me. i don't think really i'm such a very bad fellow at heart.
but i've been under paul; he has managed me, and i have not had pluck
enough to shake him off."

"this is good hearing for me, and will make your mother very happy. you
see, lad—to go back to what you said about our going to hear pastor
hahn—we've been very comfortable all these years, and enjoyed our
sunday holidays right merrily, and i think it would make our neighbours
chatter if we took to church-going now. as to the bible, i don't so
much mind hearing it read."

"let me learn a little more from hans first, father, and then by
degrees we'll begin to read together; now tell me how i can help you."

"there's no lack of work, my boy. trade has never been better. i wish
you would keep my books for me; you write a good hand. but can i depend
upon your being correct?"

"try me, father. it's no use for me to talk about what i want to do;
just see if i do it."

so robert was installed as his father's bookkeeper. and he applied
himself so diligently to the task that the miller hoped he really was
going to reform and be a man of business at last. when the rest of the
men left off work, robert made himself neat and clean and set out to
the toll-keeper's cottage, for he wanted to know if hans had seen or
heard anything of paul.

he received a kind welcome from karl schmidt, who told him he hoped
he would yet be a great comfort to his father. "but don't trust in
yourself, robert," he said. "'trust in the lord with all thine heart;
and lean not unto thine own understanding. in all thy ways acknowledge
him, and he shall direct thy paths.'"

when hans and robert were left alone, the former made light of his
interview with herr ebhardt and his son, save when he spoke of the
promise paul had given him.

"mind, robert," he said, "that you never come to an open quarrel with
your former friend. if paul breaks his word, his father will treat him
so violently that i do not like to think of what the consequences might
be; avoid crossing his path, if possible, for the present."

"i will; indeed, i will, hans. it shall not be my fault if we fall out,
but it will be rather difficult to avoid paul."

"not so difficult as you think. it is some little distance from the
mill to the master tailor's house at the far end of the village. if you
become a man of business, you will have no time to idle away, and be
less likely to meet paul."

"hans, i want to ask you a question," said robert: "is it enough for
us to live good lives—i mean, is that what you call 'sticking to the
raft'?"

"no, no, robert, 'sticking to the raft' is quite another sort of
life. instead of depending on yourself, you depend on the finished
work of your saviour, who shed his most precious blood on the cross
for sinners. you feel how utterly impossible it is to do, or to say,
or to think anything that is right, so you cast your care on christ,
and believe in him as the only saviour, and you yield yourself to him
broken-hearted for your sin, and say, 'lord, i believe; help thou mine
unbelief.'"

"oh, hans, how i wish i had not wasted my life; i am so ignorant,
compared with you."

"there is time for you to learn, and to repent; thank god for life and
health, and come to him at once. cry to him for the guidance of the
holy spirit before you lie down to rest."

"when you pray, what do you say, hans? i don't believe i ever said a
prayer in all these years!"

"did you ever ask your father for anything that you wanted very much?"

"yes, very often."

"then just ask god in the same way to forgive your sins for christ's
sake. don't pray with your lips only, for that is no prayer, but let
your words come straight from your heart. now, robert, i must not stay
here any longer, for it is just the time the master and i go to read
with frau schmidt."

"do you think i might come too?"

"i don't know, but i will ask." and hans ran upstairs to prefer his
request.

"by all means let robert join us," answered the frau.

accordingly hans went to fetch his companion.

"i like to have you here," said the invalid to robert, when he entered
her room; "and i rejoice to know that you come here of your own free
will; and i rejoice still more in learning from hans that you mean, god
helping you, to become a respectable member of society. i always felt,
my dear boy, that paul ebhardt was a very unfortunate friend for you to
have chosen. poor paul! i only wish we could lead him to pause in his
unhappy course, and come to christ."

"i am afraid, mother, he has nothing in his home surroundings to
influence him for good," said karl.

"perhaps not, but i always hope on, for with god nothing is impossible.
i never forget that that mighty spirit which comes like the wind can
soften the heart of stone and turn it into a heart of flesh. and now
let us proceed with our evening reading. we are going through st.
john's gospel, robert, and our subject to-night is the healing of the
infirm man at the pool of bethesda. give robert a bible, hans, that he
may follow my son."

karl schmidt read the first twenty verses of the fifth chapter of st.
john's gospel in a clear voice. when he closed his bible, his mother,
as was her wont, made her comments on the passage he had just finished.

"it is evident," she said, "that this pool of bethesda was endowed with
a miraculous virtue; and what a boon it must have been to the sick
ones! i can picture those five porches filled with the lame, the halt,
and the maimed; and i know better than any of you here how eagerly they
would wait for the troubling of the water. health was within their
reach again, and we only understand what a precious gift it is when we
lose it. thirty-eight years is a long time to be crippled. it may be
the poor man had come to the pool time after time, hoping he would be
fortunate enough to move the hearts of some strong ones to help him
into the water—for evidently he had no power of his own to crawl there.
how many times he had come to this pool and gone away disappointed we
are not told. no one was found to take pity on his infirmities, until
the saviour passed by. the man of sorrows marked that wan, careworn
face, which he had seen lit up with anxious hope when the angel
troubled the pool, and then the hope was darkened with despair, for
again another had stepped in before him.

"'wilt thou be made whole?' asked the master.

"would he be made whole? ay, that he would; but how was this to be?

"'sir, i have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the
pool: but while i am coming, another steppeth down before me.'

"jesus said unto him, 'rise, take up thy bed, and walk.'

"there was no questioning, no doubting, no waiting. the infirm man
believed that this god-physician had almighty power to grant what he
offered; so he forgot his infirmity of thirty-eight years' standing,
and arose, rolled up the mat on which he had been lying, and walked. he
had faith in the lord's healing power, else he never had obeyed. would
he have tried to do what he did if one of us had said, 'rise up'? no;
he would have replied, 'you mock me, friend. i am helpless; i have been
diseased for more than half my life.'

"now tell me, robert, what was the first thing this poor man did after
he was healed. read the fourteenth verse of the chapter."

robert read: "'afterward jesus findeth him in the temple, and said unto
him, behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come
unto thee.'"

"yes; his first step seems to have been to go to the temple. jesus
found him there; perhaps in the fulness of his heart he longed to thank
god for his great mercy to him, in his own house. ah, robert, the day
may come when you, too, will be stricken down with disease, as this
poor man was, and then you may long in vain to frequent god's temple,
and sigh that you neglected his service while your limbs were lissom,
and you could move about at will. i used to pine to hear the gospel
preached once more, and the sound of the church bells made me sad
because i knew they did not ring to summon me to the house of prayer
and praise. but now i thank my god through christ that the longing to
do aught but what he wills has passed away. i realise increasingly that
my disease brings my saviour very near; and the nearer he is to me, the
more i am sustained by his almighty power.

   "'lord jesus, as thou wilt!
     oh, may thy will be mine.
     into thy hand of love
     i would my all resign.
     through sorrow, or through joy,
     conduct me as thine own,
     and help me still to say,
     "my lord, thy will be done."

   "'lord jesus, as thou wilt
     all shall be well for me
     each changing future scene
     i gladly trust with thee.
     straight to my home above
     i travel calmly on,
     and sing in life or death,
     "my lord, thy will be done."'

"now, karl, will you offer up prayer?"

robert took leave of the little party as soon as the evening prayer
was ended. he returned to the mill deeply touched with the simple,
earnest words he had listened to. religion felt very real to him when
he thought over frau schmidt's remarks, and the account of the sick man
being healed by the master. he felt very sick, sin-sick, weary, and
troubled. oh, if he could but hear the master's voice speaking to him!
he would rise up and obey. when he found himself alone in his room,
he knelt in prayer; yes, and there were sobs mingling with his words.
it was the cry of a broken spirit going up to heaven and pleading for
mercy at the throne of grace.

                               ————————



chapter xii.

saved by the raft.

herr ebhardt's relations towards his son did not improve after the
scene which took place in his shop with hans. he grew increasingly
stern and angry with paul—found fault with his work, and constantly
watched him. thus the boy's heart hardened towards his father, and
towards robert too, for he looked upon him as the author of all his
misery.

what provoked the master tailor still more was that the affair oozed
out in kösen, and became the common talk of the townspeople for some
days. hans was exalted up to the skies—and it was well that he knew his
own shortcomings, else he might have been spoilt by the flattery—while
paul came in for his full share of disgrace. in the meantime robert
had his part of the odium to endure. some said he was as much to blame
in the business as paul, and that he ought to have confessed to the
burgomaster and refused his prize. robert was better able to bear these
remarks because he had hans for his friend, and this fact disarmed the
outside chatterers, who argued that if richter associated with robert
klein, he must be satisfied with the part the latter had played.

robert offered his prize many, many times to hans, without being able
to persuade him to accept it, and at last frau schmidt settled the
question by saying, "do not ask hans again to take your prize, robert;
he will never consent to what you wish, and it is foolish to waste more
words over it. keep it where you can see it constantly, for it may
prevent you from indulging in boastful feelings, and help you to walk
softly by recalling the events connected with an important period in
your life."

paul was very angry that hans and robert were friends, and he would
have liked to quarrel with his former companion, but he dare not,
for even he was cowed by his father's violent temper. a crisis came
at last, which made him take a desperate step. herr ebhardt returned
home earlier than he was expected one afternoon, and found paul idling
instead of completing some work which had to be done at a given time. a
stormy scene ensued, and the next morning the lad was missing, and no
one knew in which direction he had gone. his mother wept for him, his
father cursed him, but neither of them made any effort to reclaim the
wanderer.

"god grant that he may be spared long enough to see the error of his
ways!" said hans, when robert told him of paul's flight. "oh, robert, i
wish i'd tried more earnestly to win him to christ."

many days sped along, and hans became quite well and strong again.
these were happy days for robert, who kept steadily to his business,
and tried hard to undo the bad habits of the past. it must not be
supposed that he became suddenly changed from a godless, careless boy
to an earnest, god-fearing boy; no, it was the work of days, weeks,
and months of struggle with himself against old inclinations and lazy
feelings. but he struggled in no strength of his own, but found help
for daily needs by seeking aid from heaven. pastor hahn became one of
his best friends; whereas, he formerly tried to run away, he now sought
to profit by what the good man said, and delighted in attending his
sunday class and hearing him preach in the old church of kösen.

robert's influence told on his sisters by degrees, and at last on the
miller and his wife, who in the end became too much interested in the
truths of the gospel to think of how their movements would be canvassed
by their neighbours, for they were more anxious to find peace with god
through christ than to stand well with man.

the summer was ended, and autumn set in. it was a very rainy season,
and the saale became so full that the rafts had not to wait before
shooting the weir, for the water fell over in a body and turned the old
mill wheel merrily. at one time the current ran so swiftly that some of
the foresters were afraid to bring their wood down, and hans required
all his strength to keep those who ventured over the weir in the right
current, lest they should be swept across too rapidly.

he found himself repeatedly crying, "stick well to the raft; stick on;
the current runs faster than usual."


at length the rain ceased, and the last day of october was ushered in
with brilliant sunshine. the river presented a busy scene. karl schmidt
and hans had more business to do than they could well manage, and were
glad when the shades of evening fell, and thus prevented the raftsmen
from going on their way, and obliged them to rest at kösen until the
following morning. so it came to pass that many rafts were moored above
and below the old bridge.

schmidt had gone into the town on business, and hans was sitting in the
toll-house parlour, feeling very weary and sleepy, when robert entered.

"i didn't mean to call in this evening," he said, "because i knew you
would be tired, but i was obliged to come and tell you the good news.
see what i've got!" and he pointed to a long narrow parcel.

"what is it?" asked hans.

"something for you."

"for me?"

"yes, for you, and it's from father. but before you take off the paper,
you must let me tell you all about it. you know, hans, i've never
been quite happy about the burgomaster's prize, and though i've said
nothing about it for a long time, i always wanted to make up for it.
the other day father offered me money as a reward for being so steady
at business, and then i told him what i would rather have than all the
money he could give me; and here is what i wanted. undo it."

hans unfastened the long unwieldy parcel, wondering what it contained.
but when it was free from its covering, and he lifted up the lid of the
narrow box, his eyes sparkled with pleasure, for there was such a bow
and such arrows as he had never seen the like of before.

"they are for you," exclaimed robert. "your hand is quite well now, and
next year we'll shoot as friends for the prize; or i will shoot, and
you shall win as easily as i did last time."

"this for me, robert? how kind of you! it must have cost a lot of
money; why, it's much better than my master's."

"never mind what it cost, hans; that's father's business. he ordered
it from halle, for we have an uncle there who understands what's what.
then you really like it?"

"like it, robert! why how can i help liking such a splendid present?
but i don't think i ought to take it, for you've denied yourself a good
deal to give it me."

"and i wish you would tell me who in the world i should deny myself for
like you? i owe you almost everything, hans, for you taught me to love
and serve god, and made me first think. you saved me."

"not i, robert, but christ in me," answered hans, reverently. "if i had
not found the treasure first, i should not have known its worth."

"you're right, as you always are. oh, i'm so happy! but i mustn't stay
too late, for i promised father to cast up some bills we've been too
busy to look after during the day. i shall go home as i came, over the
bridge. it was too dark and foggy and the current too strong to bring
out the boat."

"is it foggy?" exclaimed hans, moving towards the door. "i'd no idea of
it. how suddenly it must have come on; and after such a glorious day
too. the fact is, i'm so tired that unless you'd come in, i should have
fallen asleep. why, the mist is so thick you cannot see a few yards
before you," he added, looking out. "you'd better not venture into it;
you'll be walking into the river."

"don't be afraid," laughed robert. "i know every inch of the road."

"so you may, but in a fog like this it's very easy to make a mistake; i
only wish my master was safe at home," said hans, anxiously.

robert walked away from the toll-house, but he soon had to slacken his
pace. he managed to reach the weir, and now he had a little distance
to traverse by the river-side before he came to a narrow pathway which
led him to the foot of the bridge. he had to grope his way carefully
along, for at every step he took the fog grew denser. at last, he stood
still and wished he had a torch; he would gladly have returned to the
toll-house, but it was as difficult to make his way back as to go
forward.

"courage, courage," he said to himself. "i won't be a coward, after
boasting to hans that i was not afraid."

but with all his care and knowledge of "every inch of the road," he
crept so close to the river's bank, which is steep at this point, that
he lost his footing, and though he made a tremendous effort to save
himself from falling, he could not regain his balance.

robert could swim. he was paralysed for a few moments by feeling the
waters close round him, then he knew that he was being hurried along
by the stream. he tried to struggle into smoother water, but failed.
so all he could do was to cry, "help, help!" and keep away from the
bridge. this he just managed to accomplish, but he grew weaker every
minute. when he was past the bridge, he made a last effort to get clear
of the current, and this time he succeeded, for as he struck out, he
clasped something with his hands.

it was a raft, which had swung round at its moorings. he had only
strength enough left to crawl on to it; but he was saved from a watery
grave.


hans longed for his master to return; he looked out of the door again
and again, but he heard no sound of approaching footsteps. he felt very
uneasy, too, on robert's account, and debated whether it would be well
to take a light with him and go out, but then he could not leave frau
schmidt alone in the house. at last, he carried a wooden table outside
the door and set a lamp upon it, then he went up to the frau's room and
chatted with her, she meanwhile wondering why her son was so late.

hans did not tell her that he was uneasy at his master's absence
because there was a thick mist over the river; though while he tried
to amuse her, he was straining every nerve to discover if herr schmidt
were coming.

at last they heard his well-known step, and a few moments afterwards,
he entered the room.

"i'm sorry to have kept you awake so much over your usual hour,
mother," he said. "but when you know why i have been detained, you will
not be surprised. it was clever of you, hans, to put the lamp outside
to guide me home. did you suggest it, mother?"

"the frau doesn't know about the fog," interrupted hans.

"well done, my boy; it was thoughtful of you to save her the anxiety.
now, mother, let me explain everything: you may well look as if we were
speaking in an unknown tongue. the heavy rains and the hot sun have
brought about such a dense mist as i have only seen twice before in my
life; it is so dense that if i had not borrowed a torch, i could not
have found my way. that good lad kept his anxiety to himself, but set
up a beacon outside the house for me; he lighted the great lamp and put
it on a table, or i might have groped about for some time longer, or
perhaps have done as robert did, walked into the river. but he's quite
safe, now," added karl, "though he has had a great shock."

"what has happened?" asked hans, eagerly. "he was here this evening,
and i wanted him so much not to go out in the fog."

"on his way from here, then, it must have been, that he fell in the
river. as i was nearing the bridge i heard cries for help, so i made
my way to the spot from whence they came as well as i could, and two
or three others with torches joined me; we had a hard matter to find
the lad, and but for the mist lifting just at the right moment, robert
might have laid on the raft until morning. i carried him home and
waited until he became conscious."

"poor fellow!" said frau schmidt. "he must have missed his way. i thank
god he is saved."

"i do thank god," added hans. "and was he really saved by a raft?"

"yes, saved by a raft," reiterated karl. "now, mother, let us have our
evening reading."


robert was so much shaken by his accident, that two days passed before
he was permitted to see hans.

the friends were delighted to meet again, and had a long and serious
conversation together, for robert's heart was full of gratitude to god
for his deliverance from death.

"we have been talking so hard," said hans, just before he left, "that
i have not yet asked you how you managed to hold on to the raft as you
did, until help came."

"i don't think i held on; i had just enough strength to crawl on to the
top, and then i suppose i became unconscious."

"still you were saved by a raft!"

"yes," answered robert; "the raft in its double meaning has been my
best friend. there is the raft of wood which saved me when strength was
fast failing; there is that almighty raft which upholds me day by day,
and which i can cling to at all times—even the lord jesus christ."

"old fellow, my mother's words will have a deeper meaning than ever to
us both after this," said hans, earnestly. "you and i will indeed feel
the truth of what we say when we cry on behalf of ourselves and all
men, 'stick to the raft.'"

[illustration]



                            ————————————————
                  london: b. k. burt and co., printers.








*** end of the project gutenberg ebook stick to the raft ***


    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™

project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.

the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.

﻿the project gutenberg ebook of just in time
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: just in time

author: catharine shaw

release date: october 11, 2025 [ebook #77024]

language: english

original publication: london: john f. shaw and co., ltd, 1895


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook just in time ***

transcriber's note: unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.



[illustration: pollie had all the cooking to do and the bread to make.]



                            _just in time._


                                  by

                            catharine shaw

                               author of

              "dickie's attic," "dickie's secret," "alick's hero,"
                               etc. etc.


                             new edition


                     john f. shaw and co., ltd.
                            _publishers_
                   3, pilgrim street, london, e.c.



                            [illustration]

                               contents.

                            [illustration]


                             _chapter i._

   at the mill

                             _chapter ii._

   laura's secret

                             _chapter iii._

   a new friend

                             _chapter iv._

   pollie keeps her promise

                             _chapter v._

   the picnic

                             _chapter vi._

   apollyon meets pollie

                             _chapter vii._

   pollie's battle-field

                             _chapter viii._

   hard things

                             _chapter ix._

   submission

                             _chapter x._

   telling father

                             _chapter xi._

   hope

                             _chapter xii._

   off to london

                             _chapter xiii._

   pollie recognises a friend

                             _chapter xiv._

   "i never thought of it!"

                             _chapter xv._

   visitors at shanklin

                             _chapter xvi._

   missionaries at home

                            [illustration]



                            [illustration]

                            _just in time._

                            [illustration]

chapter i.

_at the mill._

"pollie, why have you not cleared up those weeds?" asked pollie's
mother from the mill door.

pollie was sitting in the fork of the old apple-tree, with her head
bending over a book.

she raised it a little, and allowed her voice just to go round the
corner of her sun-bonnet and no more, "i forgot, mother."

"i wish you did not forget so often, my dear," said her mother. "your
life is a string of forgets."

pollie's head went down again, but a frown settled on her pretty face.

she did wish that her mother would let her be, and not always be
finding out things she had not done. her aunt elizabeth did not find so
much amiss with laura or clara; nor, for the matter of that, did her
own mother seem to rebuke her brother jim half as much as she did her.

she wished she could live with aunt elizabeth, then she would be able
to do just as she liked. aunt elizabeth would say, "pollie, my dear,
would you get so-and-so for me?" or, "pollie, my dear, i want you and
laura to go for a message, will you?"

it was much pleasanter than "pollie, put on your hat and go down to
your uncle brown's!"

"i say," called jim, breaking in on this reverie, "where's the hoe?
father's been looking for it for ever so long, and i said i knew you
had had it last."

"i forgot to put it away," said pollie. "it is by the waterbutt. just
get it for him, jim."

"not i," said jim, walking away down the steep path. "you must go and
get it for him."

pollie got down quickly. if ever she did anything willingly, it was for
her father!

"eh, my little girl," he said, "this is like you. to think you should
have wasted ten minutes of my time, and there it was behind the butt
all the while!"

he drew it out from its hiding-place with some difficulty; it would
stick against the brick wall.

"how did it get here?" he asked patiently.

"it fell down behind, and i didn't stay to pull it out," said pollie.

"did you never stop to think that whatsoever your hand findeth to do
should be done with your might, eh, pollie?"

"no, father."

"i have, many's the time," said the miller, "and those sort of
hindrances aren't hindrances at all. they bring you into contact with
your lord, and i know nothing better than that for helping you along
with your work!"

pollie did not answer. she did not mind hearing her father talk so, at
least, not much. but if it had been her mother, she would have flown
off and not have heard half of it.

so she went back to her apple-tree and opened her book once more, but
she was not to be left in peace.

"pollie!" came from the mill door. "pollie!"

"yes, mother."

"come right in and set the tea. i told you that when you heard the
wheels of your father's cart you were to come right in, and i was out
at the back and didn't notice. your father's been home this quarter, i
do believe, and the tea isn't ready."

"i forgot, mother," said pollie ungraciously. "i'd have come if you had
called me."

her mother went back to her work, and pollie hastened in. that her
father should be made uncomfortable did not suit her at all. but though
she knew her tiresomeness made her mother uncomfortable, she told
herself that she certainly could not help that.

she set about getting the tea with a will, however. and as she was a
very capable girl, it did not take long before she was standing at
the mill door again, clapping her hands as a sign that her father and
brother were to come in.

jim and she were not always the best of friends. her faults lay in one
direction, jim's in another.

if pollie forgot too often, jim did not forget often enough. he was
always reminding people of things which were not done, and especially
remembered all his sister's delinquencies, and pointed them out
ruthlessly.

"how late tea is!" he remarked as they sat down.

his mother looked up and said, "yes it is; pollie forgot to come in."

pollie crimsoned, for she had bustled about so heartily that it was but
little after the usual time.

her father's words, however, brought sudden tears into her eyes, which
she would have given something to stop.

"say instead, jim, 'how nicely somebody has got our tea for us!'"

"it's poll's duty," persisted jim. "i don't see that she deserves any
praise."

"how did a son of mine feel just now, when i told him that he had put
that hay away very cleverly?"

jim's eyes went down, and there was silence for a moment.

"i could do all poll's duties and my own too, if she were not here," he
remarked presently.

"perhaps you'll have to," said his mother a little dryly, though there
was a smile in her eyes.

"how?" asked jim, too astounded to say more.

"you will find that you cannot do quite all. but as the holidays are
coming, i am going to spare pollie to visit her aunt elizabeth. you
will be at home all day to help me, and a change will do pollie good."

pollie turned hot and cold. did her mother really mean it? but her
mother was not apt to say things which she did not mean. and if she
meant it, why had she not told her quietly by herself, instead of
announcing such a piece of news to jim.

she felt very bitter, and said to herself that the pleasure of going
was quite spoilt by the way in which she had been told.

"should you like it, mary?" her mother said kindly.

"yes, mother, very much, if—"

"if what, my dear?"

"if—if you do not want me, and if—" then she burst into tears and
sobbing out something about jim being so unkind, burst from the room.

"what is this, jim?" asked their mother.

"nothing at all," said jim. "i haven't said a word to her but what you
heard. she's a stupid cry-baby!"

their mother could not suppose that pollie could take to heart the
chance words of her brother, quite two years her junior, and looking
after her daughter rather soberly, she met her husband's eyes.

"she'll be better for a little change," he said, with that tenderness
which all their lives had been 'just father' to the children. "my poor
little pollie wants one thing, and until she has that, her heart cannot
be at rest."

"what's that, father?" asked jim curiously. "i think pollie has the
best of everything—"

"she needs jesus," he said softly, as he rose and pushed back his
chair, "and i am praying every day that she may find him."

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter ii.

_laura's secret._

pollie was fifteen, and life had flowed along peacefully as to outward
circumstances. but beneath the surface, there were currents and rocks
and hidden difficulties which no one guessed but herself.

from her earliest days, her strong will had set itself up in opposition
to her mother, and though at times her sweetness of disposition
conquered, life with her was indeed a hard struggle.

her father, tender and wise as he was, pleaded with her in vain; or
if he succeeded in shewing her her duty for a little while, some
difficulty was sure shortly to arise, and then all her good intentions
flew to the winds, and pollie was as far from heartfelt submission as
ever.

so she set out to visit her aunt elizabeth with a clouded heart. her
mother's preparations, kind and thoughtful as they were, gave her but
little pleasure, for her heart was sore and hard. if only she could
been have taken to her mother's heart with a forgiving hug, she thought
she could have gone in rags willingly!

so her father drove to the market-town and put her into the train under
care of the guard, to be set down at her aunt's station, nearly a
hundred miles off and halfway between her home and exeter.

"remember there's always the blessed lord and saviour, everywhere,"
were his last words, whispered as he kissed her in the train.

and pollie set forth on her journey, and in due time arrived at her
destination.

it was three years since she had visited at her aunt's, and she did not
know the tall cousin who was standing on the platform waiting for her.

laura, a pretty girl of eighteen, soon spied her, however, for pollie
had not altered much since she had last seen her. she and clara stepped
forward and claimed their country cousin, who looked quite shy when she
saw what fashionable young ladies were come to meet her.

"here is the trap," said clara. "where is your box, mary?"

pollie did not know that her uncle had a trap. she began to be afraid
they would have got too grand for her.

"how you have grown, mary," said her aunt as they sat at tea, "but you
have the same face. i should know you anywhere. when the girls have
smartened you up a bit, you will look quite as old as clara."

pollie bit her lips. she had thought her mother had done all that was
necessary for her, and in the remembrance of her thoughtful care,
she felt more tender towards her than she had ever done. she said to
herself that her mother would never have said such a thing as that to a
newly-come visitor.

a wave of home-sickness seized her, and she had much ado to keep back
her tears.

tea was over at last, and pollie made her escape.

"come upstairs and unpack your things," said clara. "i do love seeing
people's new things!"

pollie murmured something of not having so very many things, but the
girls did not seem to hear. and presently all her clothes were spread
out on the bed, and her cousins were looking them over with such
remarks as "that will be for mornings—with a nice ribbon for her neck."
"that would be pretty fair for afternoons if that trimming were put on
better—i daresay we could do that. well, what else have you got?"

"that is my best dress," said pollie, hesitating. "isn't it good
enough?"

"that," asked laura, with an intonation of surprise that made pollie's
cheeks burn. "oh, i thought perhaps you had another in the tray of your
box."

"never mind," said clara presently, "they will do all right. ma said
she should get mary a dress if necessary. you see, pollie, we go out
ever so much, and have to be nice. but these will do for common very
well."

laura had turned away towards the glass, and was putting on a very
stylish hat.

"is that yours?" asked pollie, glad to leave the topic of her wardrobe
for that of her cousins. she wished heartily that she were back at the
mill, and could hear her mother's voice, saying in those quick tones,
"there's your father, pollie, run and open the door!"

instead came laura's complacent answer—"yes, of course it is. do you
like it?"

"it is sweetly pretty," said pollie admiringly, "only it looks almost
like a fashion-book."

"do you think so?" asked laura, gratified; then added with a giggle to
her sister, "that's what h. f. said yesterday."

"who is h. f.?" asked pollie.

"oh, my dear, you don't know of course. h. f. is a new star that has
dawned on our horizon. you will see him all in good time—from afar—if
you keep your eyes open."

pollie blushed, she hardly knew why. this seemed so different from the
way anyone talked at home.

"hush!" said clara. "here's ma."

"well, my dears," said mrs. brown, "what are you doing?"

"i am going to the cleavers, ma," said laura, "and clara is going to
help mary put away her things, and then they are going to take you out
if you care to go."

"i do not know that i do to-night. clara can come down and read to me
while i finish that blouse for her."

"oh, i don't want to read," said clara, "it would be so dull. besides,
i am going out, ma, such a lovely evening. if you want to read so
particularly, do not trouble about my blouse."

mrs. brown looked vexed. "is that the way you do to your mother, mary?"
she asked, as she listlessly turned over pollie's dresses.

"i don't know, auntie," hesitated pollie, "because i haven't anywhere
to go you know—"

"not anywhere to go? are you buried alive, child? you look rather like
it!"

"ma," said clara, "don't say that. come, pollie, i'll turn up your hair
for you, and see if i shan't smarten you up! that will be fun. and then
you and i will go out, and ma can read that old novel in peace."

as she spoke, she drew out the bow that tied pollie's long plait, and
rapidly undid her beautiful shining braids.

"what a lot. look, ma! would you not give something if we girls had
such a head of hair?"

mrs. brown did not answer. she gave half a glance at her niece, and
then said suddenly, "i tell you what, if clara is bent on going out, we
will go to-night and get you a dress for best, or a couple of dresses.
then they can be made at once, and will be ready in a day or two."

"all right," said clara, "i shan't be long over this. that is coming
splendidly. now, what dress will you put on to go shopping with ma?
this best one is the only one that is fit."

mrs. brown had left the room, so had laura.

"i say, pollie, i'll tell you a secret, only you must keep as still as
still about it. that i know you can do. but if ma were to guess, she
would spoil all the fun."

pollie was silent, debating whether she should receive the confidence
or not, and half afraid that stormy times were in front of her. before
she could make any decision, clara had gone on in a low tone—

"laura is very much admired, as i daresay you can guess."

"she is very pretty—"

"and where we go they have a lot of folks round, and young men from
the town. we are going to have a picnic next week, and then you will
see some of them. but there is one above all the rest that laura
favours and there is a little mystery about him which makes him doubly
interesting. he's been abroad a great deal, but he told laura he had
never seen anyone to compare with her—"

"does he come here?" asked pollie innocently.

"oh no, my dear. how green you are! even if ma were to allow it, pa is
dreadfully strict, almost as bad as uncle at the mill, and he would
think laura a great deal too young. oh, no, it's our secret at present.
time enough when—"

clara paused, and pollie looked up with an earnest gaze into her
cousin's face.

"i'm afraid it isn't right," she said slowly. "i wish you hadn't told
me—or, at least, i wish that laura and you wouldn't do anything like
that."

"like what?" asked clara, drawing back a little. "don't be
straight-laced, whatever you do, pollie!"

"i didn't know i was," said pollie.

"of course you were! would you have us bow to any young man we meet,
and say we must not speak to him on any account?"

pollie felt very foolish, and did not know what to answer, while still
she felt that her favourite cousin had grown different since the year
before, when they had had such a happy time together at the mill.

"there! now you look lovely," said clara. "just peep in the glass. put
on this dress now, mary, and i'll go and tell ma that we are nearly
ready."

so pollie was left alone.

oh for her father to tell her what was right and wrong. she felt all
mixed up, and so home-sick that she could willingly have packed her box
again and set off home that very minute.

she sat down on a chair by the window and swiped away two or three
scalding tears.

why would not her dresses do, and why had her cousins glanced at each
other, as they lifted out the hat her mother had trimmed for her with
such care?

"pollie, pollie, where are you?" called clara. "ma is waiting, and she
is quite vexed we have been so long."

mrs. brown had a cloud on her brow. "put on your other hat, will you,
mary, my dear? as we are going shopping," she said, as pollie ran down
into the hall.

for a moment pollie paused, utter refusal in her heart and in her
eyes. then courtesy to her aunt and hostess prevailed, and she turned
upstairs again slowly, thinking that this was the very hardest thing
she had ever had to do in all her life.

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter iii.

_a new friend._

"that is better, my dear," remarked her aunt, when she re-appeared with
her best hat on. "you must not mind, mary, if i get you a few things:
i told your mother i should do so. you see town ways are so different
from country ways, and what will do for a village will not do for
chichester."

so two smarter dresses were purchased, and then pollie was led into the
millinery department, where her aunt chose a new hat for her, remarking
that clam had better retrim the one she had on, to make it look more
fashionable.

pollie tried to cheer up, but her heart felt like lead. ten times
better would it have been to bear the heaviest yoke that had ever been
given her at home!

the dresses were to be made at the draper's at which they were
purchased, and were promised for the next evening; the hat was to be
sent home at once, and with a few ribbons and gloves the party returned
home, clara congratulating her cousin with bright smiles, on the pretty
new things which she had received.

thus, pollie settled down to her visit. no more was said about her
clothes, and so long as she put on what they suggested, she was now
free to enjoy herself.

clara was very kind to her, and to a certain extent she did enjoy
herself. but the two sisters had a good many secrets from which she was
excluded.

laura was out a great deal, and seldom enlarged on what she had done,
and where she had been, to her family circle. she attended classes at
the school of art, and went and came very much as she liked.

but pollie, who saw a little more of what went on behind the scenes,
fancied that her devotion to art was more assumed than real. she could
not help noticing that she went early and returned late, and that clara
and she always had secrets when she returned from the lessons.

flowers, which were put into vases in her bedroom, but never appeared
downstairs, became more frequent as the days came and went. and once,
meeting her cousin in the hall unexpectedly, pollie saw her put her
hand down by her side as if to conceal something. and when she next
went into laura's room, a glass of lovely fresh roses stood on her
dressing-table, which had not been there half an hour before.

polls felt very uneasy, and once or twice tried to hint a protest to
clara.

"oh, my dear, what nonsense!" was her light answer. "all is fair in
love and war, you know. ma will know all in good time if there is
anything to know, and if not, where is the good? all the girls of our
acquaintance have somebody devoted to them, and why should not laura?"

"i don't know," sighed pollie. "i wish i knew. it can't be right to be
secret over it. i'm not at all nice to mother at home, but i never keep
anything from her!"

"that's your way, and this is ours," said clara, comfortably. "there
would be no fun in life if we came and told ma everything."

"i am afraid it isn't right," persisted pollie, "and i don't believe
laura will be a bit the happier for it. she looks so restless now, and
turns so red and white whenever anyone speaks to her."

"nonsense!" said clara, looking rather uneasy. "what a stupid little
thing you are. we move in a perfectly different circle from you, and
you can't judge. pa's shop is ever so much better a position than your
mill, and girls like us do differently of course to what you do. why we
keep two servants, and you haven't one!"

"it is not riches but right," said pollie, stoutly, though she felt
very hurt, and turned to her book resolutely, wishing once again that
she were back at her mother's side, helping her with the housework, and
doing even the little services which she particularly disliked.


one morning her uncle said to her at breakfast, "mary, i am going to
drive a little way out of town to-day. there's an old lady lives there
that your father wished you to call on. i have not had an opportunity
yet, but we will go to-day."

pollie was delighted to go with her kind, genial uncle, especially as
she would have him all to herself, and she enjoyed that drive more than
anything she had done since she had been at chichester.

mr. brown said he had business further on, and promised to call for her
in half an hour. so pollie entered the little rose-covered house, and
was ushered by a smart little maid into the presence of her father's
friend.

"welcome, my dear," said the old lady. "i have been looking for you
for a fortnight, but you've come now, and we will enjoy each other
i hope. sit down, my dear, and take that plate of strawberries, and
help yourself to some cream. there! such a hot day as this, they are
acceptable. and while you eat them, i will have some too, to keep you
company."

pollie had been dreadfully shy, but the sweet old lady was so cosy that
she felt at ease at once. and by the time she had helped her to some
fruit and sugar, she thought it was impossible she could have been a
perfect stranger only five minutes ago.

the old lady chatted away to her, and only seemed to play with her own
strawberries. she told her stories of her dear father when he was a
boy, and described his home so vividly that pollie felt as if she had
been to exeter, and had sat in the farmhouse kitchen and shelled her
grandmother's peas in the sunny window.

the half-hour slipped by all too fast, and pollie had taken a low
stool, and was holding her new friend's hand and looking in her face,
when she said gently: "little pollie, is your father's saviour your
saviour?"

the colour rushed to pollie's cheeks. what would she have given to be
able to have said "yes" to that question?

the old lady saw the answer even before pollie's lips framed the
sorrowful little sentence, "i'm afraid not, ma'am."

"poor little pollie," she said softly, then added brightly, "there's no
reason why he should not be this very day though. he says, 'him that
cometh to me i will in no wise cast out.'"

pollie did not answer. it seemed so hard and difficult to her.

"ask him to draw you, dear! will you?"

again pollie hesitated. did she dare to give such a promise as that?

the old lady did not press it. "has your uncle taken you to the town
hall, where they are having such beautiful meetings?"

pollie shook her head.

"not? well, i am surprised. there's a young man there that is drawing
quite a crowd every night, and numbers are finding a blessed saviour,
and through him eternal life. will you go and hear him, pollie?"

"i will if i can," said pollie, looking up earnestly.

then they heard her uncle's trap draw up at the gate, and pollie jumped
up and flung her arms round her father's friend.

"oh, i'm so glad i came!" she said. "may i come again if uncle will
bring me?"

"by all means," said miss loveday. "good-bye, dear!"

"good-bye," said pollie, hastening to the door. then, ere she opened
it, she ran back and imprinted one more kiss on the white cheek. "i
didn't answer you," she whispered. "i will do what you said!"

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter iv.

_pollie keeps her promise._

pollie had made two promises, and as she drove along by her uncle's
side, she was earnestly considering how she should set about keeping
them.

she did not, however, guess the difficulties that would be raised when
she got back, or she would have gained her uncle's permission at once.

when she asked at dinner if she could go to the meeting that evening at
the town hall, her aunt and cousins made so many objections that pollie
did not know how to press the matter further.

she subsided with burning cheeks, and the more they told her she ought
not to go, the more she longed to do so.

"what is it, mary?" asked her uncle, coming in just as laura was saying
something about its not being respectable.

"i promised miss loveday to go to the town hall to-night if you and
aunt elizabeth would allow me?" said pollie, her eyes filling with
tears at his kind look.

"well?"

"but aunt elizabeth does not think i can go."

"i'll talk to your aunt, mary. if you have promised an old friend, i
should like you to go—i will take you myself."

mrs. brown shrugged her shoulders, and no more was said. but in the
evening, her uncle told pollie to bundle on her hat, and they went
together.

she had another promise to keep, and as she sat in the packed audience,
her heart beat fast when she remembered that now was a chance which
might never come again, and what if she did not take it?

       *       *       *       *       *

"some of you have come here to-night above all things to make a
decision, and you almost dread that the evening should be over and you
should go back to the old life just your old self.

"and well you may. you feel you cannot save yourselves; that is true,
to be sure. you say you have no faith, and that is probably true too.

"but don't look for faith with your weary eyes; don't try to save
yourselves with your weary hearts. the remedy is jesus.

"look how these israelites got better of their deadly snakebites. not
by trying to save themselves from the fiery serpents; not by looking
within themselves to see if they had faith; but they were saved
simply by looking off to the appointed way of healing which god had
provided—the serpent of brass raised high on a pole in their midst—and
so looking, and so believing, the thing was done; they lived.

"that is how we believe in jesus christ. he says himself, 'as moses
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the son of man be
lifted up: that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

it was over. pollie and her uncle walked slowly home in the june
twilight.

"wonderful!" said mr. brown, looking up into the deep blue vault above
him. "wonderful that i never saw that before."

pollie was almost sorry that he had spoken, but she thought that she
ought to answer, so she said:

"what, uncle?" thinking it was a bright star he meant.

"i've heard those words hundreds of times, but to-night god has opened
my eyes, and i have seen his glory for the first time—"

pollie squeezed his arm.

"i thought it was some great thing to do to be saved. i find it was
only a look, eh, pollie?"

"yes," whispered pollie very low.

"how long have 'you' known what that look meant?" he said, bending down
to her.

could pollie speak? her tongue seemed as if it were tied. then she
thought suddenly, "with the mouth confession is made," and she suddenly
looked up with all her heart in her eyes.

"oh, uncle, i've had father and mother all my life, but it's only just
now that i—that i've had jesus! i never knew before, but i do now."

"mary! mary! my little girl, how glad i am we came!"

they walked along in silence after that.

but when they reached home, her uncle went in straight to the
drawing-room, and kissed his wife affectionately. "my dear," he said,
"i'm glad i went, and so is mary. we have learned what is worth the
whole world. thank god for it."

thus pollie began her new life, and she had reason to thank her uncle
many times for linking her so kindly with himself in the change of
which he spoke. but for that she sometimes felt as if she never could
have got through the next fortnight.

her aunt and cousins treated the whole matter as an absurd joke. the
obnoxious meetings were now over, the young man who had conducted them
had returned to his home before sailing (he had said) for a distant
country, and now all thoughts were centred on the picnic to which they
were invited, and, except for an occasional sarcastic allusion to
"excitement" and "sensationalism," the subject was dropped.

pollie was thus thrown back the more completely on the love and
tenderness of her new-found saviour. as she had no earthly helper, she
went away by herself and told him; and thus waiting upon the lord her
strength was renewed, and she learned to find her rest and satisfaction
in him, as perhaps she never would have done in brighter hours.

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter v.

_the picnic._

the day of the picnic drew near at last, and laura and clara could talk
of nothing else.

pollie had a dress specially prepared for it, and her cousins said
at least she would be no disgrace to them, which she considered high
praise.

they, however, had so many secrets about the whole matter that pollie
often wished herself at home, in spite of the natural anticipation
which such a day's pleasure was likely to create to one who had lived
such a quiet life.

her cousins were constantly whispering about h. f., and openly talked
of the numbers to be there, the splendid arrangements made, and the
picturesqueness of the woods to which they were to drive.

"shall you introduce me to h. f.?" asked pollie of clara, as they were
dressing on the eventful morning.

"oh, don't fuss!" exclaimed clara, hurrying with her tight dress, and
despairing of being in time. "you just keep quiet, and you'll see! i do
not suppose there will be any introducing. i expect he will come and
make ma's acquaintance soon, for he is devoted to laura, and i expect—"

but there she broke off, and then added hastily, "but don't fuss or
stare, there's a dear, and you will see for yourself."

so they started, and pollie's quiet eyes had plenty of time to note
everything, as her cousins took but little notice of her. had it not
been that she made acquaintance with a little lame girl, she would have
been utterly alone.

hand in hand they wandered among the lovely woods, picking honeysuckle
and wild roses, while from afar they could see the groups of young
people flitting hither and thither, laura and clara in their bright
pink dresses being conspicuous among the gay crowd.

by-and-by pollie missed laura from the rest, and was wondering where
she could be, when two girls came strolling up and seated themselves on
the blue bank of wild pansies, where she and her little new friend were
sitting.

"they've gone up the hill to see the view," remarked one of them.

"i have not seen them at all," said the other.

"she looks sweetly pretty to-day," said the first, "and ever since he
has been staying here, he's been devoted to her. but then he always is
to the last pretty face he comes across. then he goes away and forgets.
at least that's what he has done where i live near exeter. there are
two or three girls whose hearts he has broken there—"

"i hope he will not treat laura—"

"oh, please!" said pollie, starting up. "i did not know you were
talking of anyone i knew. please, i will go away."

she hurried from the spot with burning cheeks, her little lame friend
hobbling after her as quickly as she could.

"did you ever see so many wild flowers?" she said, when at length she
caught her up.

"yes," said pollie absently.

"are you very vexed?" asked the girl, looking up at her. "i don't like
you to be vexed."

"rather," said pollie, "but it is a thing i can't do anything in. i did
not mean to hear their secrets, and now i do not know whether i ought
to tell laura."

"perhaps she knows," suggested the girl.

pollie shook her head. "they've been carried away with the fun, but i
am afraid it isn't right to keep it all from their mother. that's why i
am vexed."

the lame girl put her hand into pollie's with comforting little
pressure, but her next words surprised her very much. "did you notice
that it was i who sat by you on that thursday night?"

that thursday night was to pollie truly "a night to be much
remembered." there could be no other in her calendar.

she turned and looked into the lame girl's face. "were you?" she asked.

"yes, close to you. i guessed what you felt by what i felt. and when i
saw your face coming out, i knew you had 'come' as i had."

"oh, daisy! i was just going to tell you about it when those girls came
and sat down by us."

"and i was just going to tell 'you,'" said daisy smiling. "i
thought—but i know so little—only when you looked worried just now i
thought—"

how delicately the words were spoken! pollie knew by the flush on
daisy's face that they were costing her a great deal.

"you thought, dear?"

"that it was so nice to carry our worries, whatever they are, to the
lord jesus, and he would see to them."

"yes," said pollie, with a little sob, "i do. i've had so many worries
since that thursday; and yet—"

"yet you would not go back, would you? that's just like me. i do
believe since that thursday i have minded more about my bad uncle than
i did before, but then i've been more comforted than i ever was before."

"oh, so have i!"

"and only this morning," daisy went on softly, "when we got out of
the brake, your cousin would have stayed to help me out. but he—that
gentleman who was talking to her all the way—he said 'don't stop for
that lame child; she will be all day getting out!'"

"oh!" said pollie sorrowfully. "how could he?"

"that is why i said i thought she knew. she could not help knowing
after that."

"poor little daisy!"

"it did not matter. that was just another time that my lord jesus
comforted me. i just told him that my heart was made heavy, and somehow
it was like the look at the brazen serpent again—i mean when i spoke to
jesus—i was made whole. isn't it wonderful?"

thus the day passed away, and to those two at any rate it was a happy
day. they kept near each other all the time, and drove back in the
evening in the same brake.


clara and laura arrived home very tired and strangely dull. very little
could be got out of them by their mother, who expected to hear long
histories of what they had done and whom they had seen.

but when pollie was undressing, clara came in and shut the door.

"mary," she said in a low tone, "don't you let out a word to ma about
h. f. i believe, after all, he's a dreadful flirt. he's going away by
the first train to-morrow morning, and i do not believe we shall ever
see him again."

"i don't think he can be very good or kind," said pollie gently; "for
if it is the one i once saw with laura, who gave that poor dog such a
kick—"

"yes, that was he. he has wished us good-bye, and it is all over i
do believe; for when i asked him if he were not going to fulfill his
promise of calling on ma, he said laughing, 'i'll keep it ten years
hence, miss clara, if i don't forget!' and then he jumped back into the
brake and drove off."

"does laura mind much?" asked pollie, hesitating.

"you don't know how much!" exclaimed clara. "he's been with her almost
all day long for a month, sometimes at one place and sometimes at
another, and if ma knew about it, i don't know what she would say. well
it can't be helped, i suppose; and laura will have to get over it as
best she can."

pollie had never seen clara so dispirited before. she got up and put
her arms round her lovingly.

"i'm so sorry," she whispered.

"it's very kind of you to say so," said clara, wiping her eyes, "for
i'm sure we have not deserved much pity, we've been so horrid to you
all this fortnight. but if you'll not tell ma, we will never cease to
thank you."

she raised herself hastily as she heard a step outside.

"i do not see that it is my business unless i am asked," said pollie
slowly, "but you'll be ever so much happier if you tell all yourselves.
do, do, clara!"

but clara only shook her head. "i couldn't," she murmured.

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter vi.

_apollyon meets pollie._

pollie's return home had been postponed till the picnic was over. now
there remained nothing to do but to pack up.

she longed to wish her father's dear old friend good-bye, but did not
like to propose it. her uncle however settled the matter by offering to
drive her out there the last evening.

the old lady received them with open arms, for mr. brown had already
called upon her and told her their good news, and pollie never forgot
the joy which they had as they sat together and talked of their
saviour's love.

"i've proved him for fifty years," said miss loveday, "and have found
him faithful."

they had not long to stay, however, and just as they were going, the
old lady said to pollie, "my brother is vicar of your village, pollie.
do you know our niece, mary, who lives with him?"

"i have often seen her," said pollie, "but i did not guess she was your
niece!"

"here is a note to her to ask her to persuade your father to let you
join her class. you would like that, pollie?"

pollie's eyes glistened. "indeed i should," she answered earnestly.


so it came to pass that before another week was out, miss mary loveday,
the vicar's niece, came up to the mill, and made acquaintance with
pollie, and obtained permission for pollie to attend her class. and
there sprang up between them a strong attachment, which bid fair to be
lifelong.

thus, pollie began her new life. she had written to her father to
tell him about that wonderful thursday, and the first time he had the
opportunity, he invited her to drive to market with him.

"so pollie," he said, when the horse was well on its way, and they had
left the village behind, "so you've come home a different girl!"

"yes, father," said pollie, with her usual straightforward candour.

"it's a solemn thing to take his name upon us," said her father. "it
needs watching as well as praying, pollie!"

pollie had not thought of that exactly.

"how do you mean, father?"

"why you see 'tis like this, pollie," said the miller, "we read a
goodish bit about soldiers and armour and fighting and watching in the
bible, and many of us would as lief as not put on a sword and a helmet
and a drum and march along to battle!"

pollie laughed a soft little laugh at her father's quaint way, in which
he often lodged a thought in his children's hearts, which would not
have got in perhaps in a long sermon.

"and if apollyon were to come to meet us, we should be very brave with
our drum, and try to frighten him off, or fetch him a cut with our
sword, and think to demolish him at a blow, eh, pollie?"

"i don't suppose the 'drum' would do much good," she answered smiling.

"no; nor do i," said her father, smiling too. "but the fact is, pollie,
apollyon doesn't come stalking along the road with fire coming out of
his mouth! and the battle isn't out of doors on a wide plain, or even
in a dark valley! it's at home, my child, in the mill and in the school
and in the market, we have to face our foes. they come to some of us
the first thing in the morning with—

"'pollie, mind you clear out "all" the ashes from the kitchen grate,'
or 'pollie, where's my hammer that you had last night?'"

pollie's head went down; how true that sounded; how like that very
morning!

"or the battle-field may come to some of us like this—it may come in
thoughts of worry, in cares for the future, in fretting over the low
price flour fetches—half a dozen things—all invisible foes, but as bad
as apollyon nevertheless.

"or it may come to jim in his sister's voice like this: 'jim!' (sharp
as a nettle sting) 'jim! you haven't washed your hands for breakfast!
jim! you said you'd take that note to miss loveday, and you haven't!'"

"oh, father!" said pollie in a low distressed tone.

"'tisn't that i want to grieve you, my little girl," continued her
father kindly, "but i want you and myself to remember that satan is
very strong and very watchful, and we are very weak and very careless.
let us watch as well as pray, pollie; let us 'stand fast in the lord,
and in the power of "his" might.'"

"i will try to remember," said pollie humbly.

"your greatest enemy is your not being willing to submit to your
mother, my child. apollyon meets you every day there!"

pollie knew that that was true, and her father's words had been so
tender that even her proud little spirit did not take offence.

it was hard work to settle in to the homely duties of the mill after
her gay, easy life at chichester, but now she understood what it was to
have strength "renewed," and when she went for it, she received it from
her lord and master.

so the months rolled on. occasionally she heard from clara, but her
letters were not satisfactory. they still kept their secret from their
mother, and nothing more had been heard of "h. f.," as clara still
called laura's friend.

of laura she said very little, but pollie gathered that she was
restless and sorrowful. she thought how such a secret would prey upon
her own mind, and did not wonder.

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter vii.

_pollie's battle-field._

"you'll have to go down to the stream, and bring up the biggest goose,
poll," said her mother, wringing up a towel very hard, and throwing it
in the basket. "i can't think why you have not done it an hour ago!"

"i was busy," grumbled pollie. "you told me to wash the teacups, and
sweep the kitchen, and make the beds, and clean the step, and peel the
potatoes—"

"so i did," said her mother vexedly; "and still there would have been
plenty of time if you hadn't idled away half your morning. i never did
see any one so provoking in my life!"

if there was one thing pollie hated to do, it was catching and carrying
the struggling, cackling geese when her mother happened to sell any.
but even that unpleasant duty had not been the chief reason of her
delay that morning.

her sunday-school teacher had offered a prize for the greatest number
of texts found on a certain subject, and she had been searching for
them when she was upstairs making the rooms straight. her conscience
told her that she was not doing right, but she had persuaded herself
that it could not be wrong to be reading her bible.

she sauntered forth now very unwillingly, and made her way over the
stony path down to the brook.

her teacher would be pleased, at any rate, she thought, even if her
mother was not. and her teacher was more important than mother. miss
loveday always spoke gently, and never seemed to have any difficulties.
she couldn't have rooms to sweep, or tiresome geese to catch.

pollie had a long chase, and a hard struggle with the strong bird
before she turned homewards. and just as she was battling up the hill,
with the wind nearly blowing her down, and the geese making a hubbub
around her, who should cross her path but miss loveday herself, walking
slowly along.

"why, pollie!" she said.

pollie held on to her charge and blushed crimson, thinking of her late
thoughts.

"i've done the texts, ma'am," she said, after a moment.

"already?"

polly hung her head, while miss loveday added, "i hope it was not
instead of some duty, little pollie. girls at home haven't much time
in the morning, and this is only monday! to please jesus, the 'right'
thing must come before the pleasant thing."

with a gentle smile she passed on, and pollie pushed up the hill, and
at length stood before her mother, still holding on to her burden.

"the geese nearly tore me in pieces," she said ungraciously. "i wish
james would have caught it before he let them out this morning; he
might just as well!"

"what have you been doing upstairs, pollie?" was her mother's greeting,
as she took the heavy bird from her.

no pity for the wind, no sympathy for her hard struggle and hot climb,
no thanks for her work, only sharp blame implied in the tone of her
mother's inquiry!

"i was making the beds, mother."

"you couldn't take an hour over two beds, and that's how long you were!"

polly was silent. she did not wish to explain, and was only anxious to
get out of the way before any more questions should be asked.

"where shall i put the goose, mother?"

"in the coop; your father's going to kill it when he comes home to
dinner. what was it you did while you were upstairs?"

"something for miss loveday."

"instead of your work? then you will not go to class next sunday."

sharp and unalterable came the blow. pollie knew that she had lost her
chance.

full of passion, she slowly took the goose from her mother, and walked
out to the empty hen-coop. then she went back again, and began to clean
the knives for dinner with a black frown on her face.

miss loveday never had such things as this to bear! such hard, hard
things! she had all things smooth in her life, she was sure!

when she thought of sunday, she felt as if she could not bear it. the
knives flew along the board, and the brickdust flew about the floor,
and still pollie felt stunned with disappointment and anger.

"what's up?" said her father's voice in the doorway.

"only poll's doing things for her class, and neglecting her home," said
her mother's voice from the kitchen.

"i'm sorry for that," said her father gravely, "because pollie will
have to let go the class, if so."

"that's what i told her," said her mother.

pollie was going to speak, but her passion sealed her lips. she only
went on cleaning faster than ever.

her mother went upstairs for a clean apron, and pollie found herself
alone with her father, who was standing warming his hands at the fire.

"mother's so hard on me, father," she said bitterly, from her position
at the knife-board.

there was no answer, and the girl came to the doorway.

"it is cruel to keep me away from the class, when i didn't mean to do
any harm."

"your mother won't do anything cruel," answered her father. "if you
haven't done wrong, she'll not punish you. if you have, it's best to
find it out, pollie, and not be let go on wrong."

"it can't be wrong to search for texts!"

"i don't know that! there's many a one that does a lot of god's 'work,'
and forgets to do his 'will.'"

her mother came back at the moment, and pollie retreated from the
doorway and fetched the knives, wiping them carefully and setting them
round table, that her father, at any rate, might see no fault in her
performance of that duty. she did not glance towards her mother, and
sat in silence for the rest of the dinner.

when it was over, she cleared the things into the scullery, and, as was
her habit, she shut the door and began to wash the dishes.

her mother's voice rose and fell for a few minutes in the kitchen, and
then she heard her father go out, and all was still.

pollie worked away perhaps all the faster that her spirit was so high,
and soon all was done, and she stood still, undecided as to what she
should employ herself upon for the rest of the afternoon.

she would have gone up to her texts, but this involved passing through
the kitchen, and she did not care to face her mother. besides, what was
the use of doing them if she might not go to the class?

this thought made her almost frantic. she had promised miss loveday,
yes, promised; what could she do now? slowly her hand was put out
towards the kitchen door, and softly she turned the knob, uncertain
what she should say to her mother when she got there, but, at any rate,
very certain that she should not ask her forgiveness.

the kitchen stood empty and bare. no mother, only a clean-swept hearth
and her mother's workbasket closed and orderly.

pollie was too astonished to know what to do. generally at this time
her mother sat there mending those everlasting stockings; and if she
were going out, every one knew it.

pollie did not like to follow her mother upstairs, after her temper at
dinner, so she looked round for occupation, and seeing none that suited
her, she drew forth her knitting from the cupboard and tried to amuse
herself with that. she was even glad to hear her brother's step coming
up the path, and to know that she would not be alone any longer.

"where's mother?" asked james on entering.

"i don't know. come here, jim, and hold something for me."

"what's that?"

"my wool. i've been waiting to get this tangle out this half-hour."

jim did as he was asked, but added, "i expect mother's took sick!"

"what?" asked pollie, putting down the skein.

"took sick. she said her heart was bad before i went out after dinner."

pollie looked pale and miserable.

"i wish you'd go up and see after her, jim," she said presently.

"why don't you?"

"because i'd rather you did."

"haven't you seen to her all the afternoon?" asked james, rather
severely, as he put the wool down.

pollie shook her head. she opened the staircase door for him in
silence, and then came back to the fire.

how long his steps seemed going up, and then how long before they were
heard coming down again!

"she's bad, poll," he announced abruptly, "and she don't want anything,
and you may go out if you like."

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter viii.

_hard things._

to go out was exactly what pollie longed for, but to be sent off, and
not to be wanted, was a different thing.

she put on her hat and hurried out of the house, dashing down the hill
at hot speed, nor even stopped until she stood breathless outside her
dear miss loveday's gate, where, bending over her flowers, her teacher
stood all unconscious of her presence.

when she looked up, she saw something was wrong.

"oh, miss loveday, may i come in?" pleaded pollie.

miss loveday led the way into the back garden, and in a shady corner,
where they were quite alone, pollie poured out her tale of woe, of how
angry she had been and was, of how hard her mother had seemed, and now
that her mother was sick and did not want her to nurse her.

miss loveday listened very patiently and gently till it was all out.
"poor little girlie, jesus is sorry for you," was almost all she said.

pollie was very hard still, her grievances stood out large and bitter,
and she thought she was quite right to be angry.

and then miss loveday drew her to her side, and smoothing the
wind-blown hair with her hand she said softly—

"pollie dear, the hardest thing to bear in life is getting ever so
little away from jesus. sometimes it is a very small thing that comes
between us and him, and then it grows very quickly into a big thing!
let us go back to him, and ask him to forgive us and make us good."

pollie hung her head.

"you don't have hard things, miss loveday, i expect," she murmured.

"do i not, dearie? did you think that the girl who belongs to the lord
jesus, called pollie brown, is the only girl who has hard things to
bear?"

"i don't see that anyone else can be so tiresome as i am, nor need so
much scolding, nor have mother so cross!"

"those are your trials just now, pollie, but i have had hard things
too—if you only knew."

pollie did not know enough of the world to understand that each heart
knows its own bitterness. that trials which seem trifles to one looking
on may be heavy burdens to the weak strength which has to bear them.

but miss loveday understood, and that was why she could give out such
true sympathy.

"dear miss loveday—but you do not have anyone telling you to do what
you do not like, do you?"

"i have even had that, in a harder way than you can understand. would
it help you to tell you, pollie?"

"please, dear miss loveday," she answered, still dwelling on her own
grievance, and thinking nobody else's could be as great.

"pollie, did you ever hear of any one having some one she loved more
than all the world, taken away without a moment's warning, and told
never, never to come back?"

pollie looked up questioningly, but when her eyes met miss loveday's,
she buried her head in her lap.

"and then i found out that i had loved him more than jesus! some of us
love ourselves more than jesus, and some of us—"

"i'll go home now and tell mother i'm sorry," whispered pollie. "oh,
miss loveday, i wish i could comfort you!"

"you have, dearie. let us both take heart. he is such a precious
saviour!"

pollie knew her time must be nearly gone. pressing a passionate kiss on
her teacher's hand, she hurried homewards, the mill standing out dark
and gaunt against the sunset sky. she had promised miss loveday to beg
her mother's pardon for her temper at dinner, but though her heart was
softened by the remembrance of a grief which was infinitely greater
than her own, yet a hard task was in front of her. and the nearer
she got to home, and the steeper the hill got, the harder became the
struggle to confess herself in the wrong.

from intending to do it the moment she got in, she began to find
reasons why it would not be a suitable time; and then came reasons for
putting it off till to-morrow or next week, until the thought presented
itself that really after all there was very little reason to do it at
all, only she had promised miss loveday.

at length, she got to the mill door, and by this time she was too out
of breath to say anything.

james was sitting at the tea-table, and looked round as she entered.

"father's up with mother, and you are to put those clothes to soak
after tea, and then mother wants you to mend those stockings."

"i shall take mother's tea up," said pollie, feeling her heart die
within her.

never before had she received messages like that through her little
brother; never before had she been anything but head and chief to do
anything her mother wanted! was her mother so angry with her that she
would not even see her?

"father has taken that up," pursued james, "and so we can begin. i
thought you would be home to get the tea, pollie."

"i was busy with miss loveday."

"you always are busy with miss loveday now; you think about nothing but
her!"

"i'm sure i don't!"

"ever since you began going to her class, you've taken to being fine in
your ways, and disagreeable at home."

"that i'm sure is wrong!" exclaimed pollie hotly. "what fine ways have
i taken up, i should like to know?"

"why, you brush your hair ever so many times a day, and wash your
hands, too; and you are always wanting me to do the same."

pollie tried to laugh, but the conversation was too much in earnest,
and she went on—

"well—there's no harm in that, i should hope."

jim thought there was, but he pursued—

"then you are cross to mother, and are always thinking of what you can
do for miss loveday; in fact, you think of her before mother!"

pollie crimsoned, for she felt that the indictment was true.

"well, come to tea," she said abruptly.

she sat down at the table and filled the two cups, the only two which
were there. was father up with mother then, and was she so sick as not
to be able to be left?

pollie felt utterly miserable. she longed for her father to come
downstairs; she longed for james to go to bed; she longed for anything
which should give her relief from her heartache.

and all the while the relief was close to her, had she but turned to
it! "he is such a precious saviour," miss loveday had told her, from
the depths of such a sorrowful heart as pollie could not even dream of.
and yet the girl nursed her own grievance, and forgot to look to him in
whom is comfort and relief for every care, be it large or small.

what a long time it seemed before james had finished his lessons!

pollie washed the teacups, and put the washing in to soak; she soaped
all the clothes in the way her mother liked, and did her work with a
will, so that long before she wished it, there was nothing left to do.

while she was busy in the scullery, her father came down the little
staircase into the kitchen, and went out to do something about the
mill, and she did not hear him come in again, for the splashing water
drowned all other sounds.

at last, too uneasy to bear it any longer, she took off her shoes, and
passing through the kitchen, she ascended the few steps to her mother's
room, and stood trembling outside her door, but she could not pluck up
her courage to enter. all was still, except that she thought she could
hear the occasional turning of the leaves of a book.

so she crept down again. surely she had not deserved such punishment at
this!

"jim, why won't mother let me go and wait on her?" she asked, as she
entered the kitchen.

"i don't know, unless it's your black face," said jim, with a very
superior feeling of having his chance now to pay off a few old scores.

"black face?" asked pollie, glancing in the little glass which hung by
the window, "i don't see—"

"of course you don't! but i did, at dinner, and so did mother. when
people's hearts are bad, they don't want black faces about 'em. i heard
mother say so!"

pollie crimsoned, first with shame and then with anger. she clenched
her hands together with a pressure which positively hurt her. and then,
after a moment's bitter struggle, she proudly took her candle and went
to her little room next to the kitchen where she could be alone, to see
no one again that night, if she were wanted so little as that.

suddenly a thought struck her. if her mother would not see her, she
would write her a letter.

that would be a great deal easier than saying it, and it would do just
as well.

she hurriedly seized a piece of paper, and tossed off a few words.
then, having by this given some vent to her feelings, she sat down
dejectedly as before, listening for an opportunity to ask her father to
carry the note for her. she was sure he would do that!

and then she looked out on the quiet moonlight, and as she did so, she
saw the spire of the church glittering in the soft beams, and she could
picture miss loveday's eyes resting on the same sight, and could even
hear again her soft thrilling tones, "he is such a precious saviour."

she thought it was all very well for a girl like the vicar's niece to
be able to get on.

pollie thought of her own cousins at chichester, and even wished
herself back with them, and in her discontent even began to envy them.

she liked smooth things; and now, just as she had come home with the
new-found joy of her new-found saviour, to have every day such hard
things to face seemed to her inexplicable. she suddenly thought of what
her father had said about apollyon meeting her in her-every day life,
but she put the thought away with a shudder.

no, pollie's heart was hard yet. she only looked at the moon, and
thought of her friend down in the valley, but as yet she refused to
hear the voice of her best friend, one who sticketh closer than a
brother, who would surely have aided her if she had turned to him.

the old-fashioned clock which stood in the kitchen struck the hours one
after another, and the candle burned down to half its size. so pollie
put it out and got into bed by the moonlight.


after some time, she heard james go up to his little cupboard of a room
over hers; she heard her father go round with his swinging lantern to
shut up the mill for the night. she heard him rake open the fire, and
then clink a cup and saucer; she heard him stir something for ever so
long, and then go up to her mother with the cup and saucer. she heard
him talking in a low tone, and then he came down again and shut the
kitchen door, and all was still.

what could have happened? surely that was ten o'clock striking, and her
hard-working father was invariably in bed by that time.

the sense of desolation grew unbearable. several times she had
determined to speak to her father, but now she could stand it no
longer. hastily lighting her candle, and taking her letter in her hand,
she stepped noiselessly to the door opening into the kitchen, and
peeped into the dim fire-lighted room with beating heart.

there sat her father, fast asleep, with his arm resting on the large
bible.

pollie did not know what to do. all at once, she felt ashamed of that
hasty, passionate apology which she had written.

would her father think it worth taking to her mother? "was" it worth
taking?

she hurriedly put it on the glowing embers, and then stood waiting and
trembling till her father should stir.

at length the candle flickered in its socket, and he woke with a start
to find his little daughter crouching by the fire wrapped in a big
shawl.

"why, pollie," he said, "i thought you were in bed."

"so i was, father, but i could not sleep. how is mother now?"

"she's a bit easier, i hope."

"why are you sitting up then, father?"

"i was waiting to give her her medicine at eleven o'clock. i was afraid
if i got to bed, i might oversleep myself."

"father, why did not mother want me to wait on her?" asked pollie,
hesitating, while her cheeks burned.

"mother was too poorly to be worried, pollie. i've been very anxious
about her. i saw that you hadn't come round to be a right down good
girl, and so thought you'd better keep out of her room."

pollie was silent. was she "a right down good girl" now? she hardly
knew.

"go to bed now, my dear, and ask god to help you. he can soften hard
hearts when we can't ourselves."

pollie hurriedly kissed him, and went back to her room. she thought she
would kneel down and do as her father advised, but how cold she was,
and of how little use it could be to be sorry if she might not go to
her mother even if she were.

so she crept into bed, sad at heart, and only longed for the morning,
when the bright sunshine should perhaps help to banish the clouds of
vexation which hovered over her spirit.

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter ix.

_submission._

the morning sun streamed into pollie's room, and her eyes opened to it
with a sense of relief. but soon came back the dull ache of yesterday's
wrong feelings, and she wondered if to-day could possibly be as unhappy
as that had been.

she heard her father moving about in the kitchen, and in another
moment, he put his head in at the door.

"get up now, pollie, and light the fire, while i go to see to the mill.
your mother's a bit better, i hope, to-day."

he went, and pollie hastened to dress herself. she lighted the fire,
filled the kettle at the well, and then set the breakfast; after which
she called james, and then when her father came in, she asked if she
might take up her mother's breakfast.

her father hesitated, glanced at her intently, and then gave her
permission.

so pollie poured out the tea, and slowly began to mount the stairs.

here was her chance, but though she had assured herself last night that
she had had none, when it came she was not ready to take it.

she entered her mother's room, and crept across to her side.

"i am sorry you are ill, mother," she said gently. "i hope you feel
better now."

her mother looked pale and quiet, but answered pretty cheerfully that
she did feel better, and should get up after breakfast.

and pollie, having deposited the little tray, had nothing further to
do, and came down again.

yes, she had missed her chance! it would be infinitely harder to meet
her mother next time, and have to say it then. how could she have been
so stupid, she thought, not to have done it when she might?

"you can go down to the village after breakfast with those eggs,"
remarked her father, as they sat together. "there's more than we can
eat, and it's a pity to let them spoil."

"the first thing?" asked pollie, with beating heart. then she should
perhaps see miss loveday, and have to tell her that she had broken her
promise.

"yes, directly; because if your uncle brown is going to sell them, he
will want them early."

so she started at once with her basket of rich brown and white
treasures, and soon her quick steps brought her to the bottom of the
hill, and in front of the church where her uncle brown's shop stood.

she handed them across the counter with only the number named, and then
running out of the shop, looked up the street to the vicarage, where
her darling miss loveday lived.

yes, there she was, standing at the gate waiting for the postman, and
pollie came quite close before the quiet eyes turned in her direction.

"oh, miss loveday!" she exclaimed. "i've never done what i promised! i
said i would tell mother, and i haven't."

miss loveday looked down in her face inquiringly.

"i couldn't; i did not see her last night, and then this morning i did
not feel as if i could. miss loveday, why is it so hard to do things?"

"then i am afraid, pollie dear, you did not ask the lord jesus to do
for you what you were not willing to do yourself?"

pollie hung her head. "i was so vexed i did not care to—"

"poor little girlie," said her teacher, with tender sympathy, "i know
how hard it must be. i have gone through it myself lately, so i know.
but oh, pollie, i know one thing too, and that is, that the lord works
in us by his spirit to do the things to please him, which otherwise we
could not do. with god 'nothing' is impossible."

how earnestly she gazed down the road! and what a colour flashed into
her face as the postman came in view, and trudged into one cottage
garden after another.

pollie stood spell-bound, watching him too. would he pause at miss
loveday's side, and hand her a precious missive? why had her pale
cheeks turned to deep crimson? was the letter she was expecting of such
great importance?

no! he came up quickly to where they stood, and with a smiling "none
for you, miss," passed on.

the crimson cheeks were pale now. miss loveday seemed as if all life
and hope had gone out of her face.

"come into the garden, pollie," said her teacher slowly.

perhaps she craved human sympathy; perhaps she thought that pollie's
own struggling little experience would help her to understand better
than anyone at the parsonage.

they walked quickly through the garden, and miss loveday led the way
down to the stream which flowed so quietly at the bottom of the hill;
nor did she stop till they stood close to the water's edge.

"pollie," she said, catching her breath, "i have need to remember what
i have said to you!"

"did you want a letter so much, dear miss loveday?"

"oh, pollie!" miss loveday sat down on a rock and hid her face.

"perhaps it will come another day," comforted pollie.

"i do not think it can. he will have sailed by this time," she
whispered.

pollie did not know what to answer, for she did not know all that had
come and gone. she laid her little trembling hand on her teacher's
knee, and knelt down by her side in silent sympathy.

"i will tell you, pollie, because—oh, because i'm so very, very
miserable—because i want to do right, and it is so hard!

"you know i live with my uncle and aunt? my father left me to their
care, to take their advice, to do exactly as they bid me. he made me
promise that i would obey them as if they were my own parents."

pollie pressed her hand softly; she did not dare to interrupt by a word.

"then i went on a visit to devonshire, and while i was there i met
someone who—who wanted me to go out to china with him, to make his home
happy there."

pollie shrank—miss loveday going away! but how selfish of her to think
of herself! it was evident miss loveday wanted to go, and that she
thought it would make her happy.

"when i came back from devonshire i told my uncle and aunt, and they
said they would make inquiries about—my friend—harry fulbert.

"when the answer came to their letter, i thought my heart would break.
my uncle forbade me to speak to him again. i was to write to him once
and say so, and that was all."

"oh!" said polka with filling eyes. "how dreadful! did you have to?"

"for days and days i could not—i would not. i felt sure my own father
and mother would not have done such a thing, and my heart was all in a
tumult, and i felt dreadfully angry that my uncle and aunt could be so
cruel.

"i would not speak to them about it, i felt so bad. and so it went on
for nearly a week.

"at last came sunday, when we had those words in our lesson (do you
remember them, pollie?): 'if ye do not forgive, neither will your
father which is in heaven forgive your trespasses'; and i thought how
could i prepare to give you girls that lesson, if i could not say the
words from my heart myself?

"oh, pollie, it was dreadful. at last i thought, as i have told you,
that what i could not do of myself god could enable me to do, and i
knelt down and asked him to help me to submit to his will, and to feel
rightly towards my uncle and aunt.

"then, pollie, i went down to them, and i told them how wrong i had
been to be so angry; and then i asked them why it was i might not see
harry, and begged them to let me do so.

"then, pollie, they told me that they had heard, on authority which
they could not question, that harry was not good and steady, and told
me that i must have nothing to do with him. i cannot tell you all, but
at last i had to let him go; they would not give way, and i dare not
disobey; and that is the end of it!"

pollie listened intently, her eyes gazing in the sad ones which, like a
dumb suffering animal's, sought her sympathy.

at last she said shyly:

"'did' god help you to do his will?"

there was an instant's breathless pause. then miss loveday's head sank
lower, and she said brokenly, "there was nothing else to do; i dare not
disobey."

"then i suppose it must have been," added pollie reverently.

"and if it was his will—you think i ought to be glad to do it, pollie?"

pollie was sobbing now. miss loveday opened her arms, and they cried
together for ever so long.

at last, miss loveday wiped away her tears, and began to prepare
herself to go back to the house.

"i'll never forget—never," said pollie, clinging to her; "and i'll pray
every day that god will let him come back!"

"there 'must' be some mistake, pollie, or i ought not to wish it, of
course. but i am sure—so very sure—that he loves my saviour, and wishes
to serve him."

"i will pray," whispered pollie brokenly, and then she sped home, her
anger all gone, nothing but love left in her heart which had been so
hard.

"oh, mother!" was all she could say when she found her sitting in the
kitchen. and then she found kisses of forgiveness pressed on her face,
and arms of forgiveness clasping her round.

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter x.

_telling father._

that night, pollie's mother went to bed early, and after her father had
finished his work, he came in and settled down by the fire.

how different pollie felt now that she was what her father called "a
right down good girl."

jim was upstairs reading to their mother, so she took her knitting and
sat thinking of miss loveday.

suddenly she looked up.

"father!" she exclaimed.

"well?" he asked.

"father! isn't it devonshire where grandmother lives?"

"why surely!" said father, smiling. "what's made you think of that?"

"i was wondering who you knew there."

"why do you ask?"

"father—" pollie paused. "i don't want to tell anything i ought not,
but i have somebody's secret that makes me very sad, and i wanted to
know if you knew somebody there very particularly. but i can trust you,
father."

"you may, my dear; and if i can do anybody any good, you can tell me."

"do you know anybody of the name of harry fulbert, father?"

"devonshire's a large place, but i do happen to know some one of that
name there too."

"do you, father?" asked pollie, with her heart beating fast.

"and the funny thing is i know two of 'em, pollie, as far asunder as
the poles though they are."

"two of them! how?"

"first cousins of the same name. a stupid thing, as i take it, to name
'em alike, but they do tell that neither of the sisters knew what the
other was doing till they were named, and then 'twas no use cryin' over
spilt milk! one of 'em is as good as gold, and the other, sad to say,
is not worth a brass farthin'!"

"where does the good one live, father?" asked pollie, almost
breathlessly.

"his 'mother' lives at exeter. he comes home to see her now and again,
but i believe he lives in foreign parts somewhere."

"and the bad one, father?" pollie's voice was almost faint with
anxiety. which was the one who was a friend to her dear miss loveday?

"the other knocks about everywhere. he has plenty of money, and travels
a great deal, but i would be sorry for any one 'i' loved to have much
to do with him. why do you ask me, pollie?"

"father, i hope—oh, i hope i am not wrong to tell you, but could you
find out for me? it is miss loveday, father; and he has gone out to
china to-day, and miss loveday is so sad because—." and then pollie
told her father as much as she knew herself, and begged him to help her
find out all about it.

"i told her i would pray, and i have. but i never guessed the answer
might come so soon, nor that perhaps i might bring it to miss loveday.
oh, father, do you think god will let me?"

"that i can't tell, my dear, but this i do know, it says, 'commit thy
way unto the lord, trust also in him, and he will bring it to pass.'"

pollie could hardly sleep that night for thinking of what she ought to
do about miss loveday. her father had advised her to "commit her way
unto the lord," and she did, but what was the next step?

dare she go to the vicar and ask him if there were some mistake? would
he tell her she was an impertinent girl?

if it were "right" to go, she would dare even that. but "was" it right?
what if miss loveday's friend should not turn out to be the true gold?

so she tossed till morning, and no light came. she got up early and
busied herself in her duties at the mill, but still no light came.

her mother was not very well, and pollie had all the cooking to do,
and the bread to make. her father was off early to the market with his
sacks of flour, and would not be in till afternoon. she thought and
thought, but could come to no decision.

at last, just as she had washed up the dinner-plates, and was going up
to fetch her mother to the tidy kitchen, a thought came which comforted
her: "'trust also in him; and he will bring it to pass!'"

"i've been worrying and not trusting," she said to herself.

and when she had placed her mother comfortably, and brought her
workbasket, she went into her little room and knelt down in silence by
the bedside.

then she took her knitting, and sat down on the doorstep to watch for
her father.

before long, she saw a girl making her way up the steep hill, and as
she came nearer, she found it was one of the maids from the vicarage.

her heart beat fast, and she jumped up and stood waiting, hardly liking
to run and meet her; and yet—

"pollie!" said the maid eagerly. "my miss mary is very poorly, and she
wants to see you, and i was coming all the morning, but i was too busy.
can you run down to see her now?"

so, in less than half an hour, pollie stood at her bedside, finding it
difficult to repress her eagerness. miss loveday put out her hand and
drew her down to kiss her, and began at once—

"pollie, i wanted to tell you—yesterday i thought it was harder than
i could bear. i felt forsaken, as if i never could get over it. but
to-day—"

"to-day?" echoed pollie, with her heart in her eyes. "has it come
right? oh, miss loveday!"

"right so far as this," answered her teacher gently, "that i have
trusted it all to my lord, and left it with him to do as he likes."

pollie's lips parted to speak, but the heavenly look in miss loveday's
face stopped her. she knelt down by the bed, and covered her friend's
little white hand with kisses.

"dear miss loveday, i may pray that it may all come right, mayn't i?"

"oh, yes, dear but—indeed i want to do his will—not mine."

pollie was silent. how could she break her news? and yet all the way
down the hill, she had been sure that it would be right for her to tell
miss loveday herself all about it.

"father knows devonshire," she said very softly; "he knows people
there."

"does he, dear? why do you tell me that?" asked miss loveday, looking
at her.

"father said he knew two people called that name. i thought you would
not mind, because father is perfectly safe, and he was so sorry."

and then pollie told her all she had heard, and miss loveday's pale
face brightened into a flush of hope.

"i know he's the golden gold!" she whispered. "and god has sent you,
pollie, to show my uncle that there is some mistake. oh, i am so glad
that i wanted god's will better than my own, for he gives abundantly,
pollie!"

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter xi.

_hope._

but though the first thought had been that the harry fulbert she knew
was golden gold, the second came with terrible desolation.

too late! it was too late now! that letter, so hard to write, had gone
on its way, and ere this harry would have started for china, with his
hopes crushed and his heart sore.

miss loveday tried to recall what she had said as she had sat that
evening, three days ago, doing her uncle's bidding.

"if i were to disobey those whom my father told me to obey, i should
never have a happy moment, nor could i look for god's blessing; and
what would life be without god's blessing, harry?" she had said.

she could hardly remember the words; it seemed months ago, instead of
days. but at any rate, she was sure that they had not conveyed one word
of hope!

hope! as she lay on her bed with these thoughts chasing each other
through her mind, it seemed as if there were some soothing balm being
applied to her aching wounds.

"hope thou in god!"

yes, she had! she had hoped in god when things had been at their very
darkest, when no ray of light had come, or seemed as if it could come;
and now she would praise him, who would not allow his child to be
tempted above that she was able to bear.

pollie had sat very still; she had waited till the closed eyes should
open, and the contracted forehead grow smooth, like her own dear miss
loveday.

"pollie," said her teacher gently, "will you go down now and tell my
uncle what you have found out for me?"

pollie crimsoned, but rose to her feet instantly. if there were one
person in the world she was afraid of, it was the vicar.

"am i asking too much?" said miss loveday.

"no, no; i will do it," exclaimed pollie. "but where shall i find him,
and what—"

her hand was already on the door.

"he will be coming in to tea very soon; go down and wait for him in the
study. ask one of the maids to take you there. i would rather my uncle
heard it from you, pollie!"

with one look at the dear face she loved so well, pollie, with beating
heart, sped on her errand.

she reached the hall and looked around. there were the pretty ferns and
palms, making the hall look like fairyland; the stained glass doors,
the drooping curtains, the carpeted floor, all joined in making pollie
feel strange and shy.

where were the servants? she could hear a murmur of voices and the
sound of teacups, but how could she dare to pass through one of those
closed doors?

at length a bell sounded. the fact was, miss loveday had guessed her
plight, and had rung for her maid so that she might insure pollie's
safe conduct to the study.

suddenly one of the glass doors was pushed open, and the servant who
had fetched her from the mill came forward.

"why, pollie," she said, "can't you find your way out?"

then pollie, with many blushes, explained that she had a message to the
vicar, and was forthwith shewn into the study to wait his arrival.

the maid fidgeted round the room, looking at pollie several times
uncertainly, which increased pollie's discomfort tenfold. she looked up
in her face enquiringly, waiting for her to speak.

at last she said, "hadn't you better come and sit in the kitchen till
master comes in?"

"i don't mind," answered pollie, "only miss loveday said i was to go to
the study—"

"master is very particular, and perhaps he won't like to find anyone
here," objected the maid, who, it must be confessed, was somewhat
jealous of miss loveday's evident partiality for her pupil at the mill.

pollie felt very uncomfortable, and though she had a dim perception of
the state of the case, she was so disconcerted that she would fain have
run home to escape from her difficulties.

but then, what would become of her important errand?

at length she said bravely, "if you don't think he'll like it, i'll go
up and ask miss loveday! shall i?"

"oh no," said the maid carelessly; "i daresay it doesn't matter. stay
where you are."

she went back to the kitchen to her tea, and pollie was left alone.

she waited in the darkening study till her heart was faint within her.
she had had time to grow hot and cold three or four times over before
the vicar came.

but at last, a thought quieted her, and, like hannah of old, "her
countenance was no more sad."

"if god has this in charge, why am i so worried and fearful?" was the
thought.

and so when the vicar really did come, with his grave, dignified
presence, pollie told her story as sweetly and clearly as her friend
upstairs could have wished.

"don't you think he 'may' be the true golden gold?" she asked, looking
up in the vicar's face as he bid her farewell.

"i hope so, my little girl," he said heartily; "and it shall be my
business to find that out at once. but, pollie—"

"yes, sir."

"you would not wish your dear miss mary to love any one who was not
good?"

"oh no, sir! nor would she—"

"no, no; i am sure of that. she and you may trust me to do the very
best for her. is she not god's child, as well as my brother's?"

he said the last words almost to himself, and pollie, hearing them,
went away comforted.


she ran homewards breathlessly. what would her mother think of her
absence?

she had left home that afternoon assuring her mother she should only
run down to the vicarage and back again. she had had no idea of being
detained, and was afraid her mother would be vexed with her.

just as she reached the corner of the village street, she recognized
her father's cart, making its way round the road to the back of the
mill.

"oh, father, stop!" she called. "i want to get in!"

"eh, pollie! bless you, child; what do you want out so late?"

then pollie told him, glad to pour out all her news into such kind,
sympathising ears.

"i'd not like you to keep anything from your mother," he said; "you had
better tell it all to her when james is not by."

"yes, father," said pollie slowly.

"mothers are good friends," said her father.

how she wished that he had been willing to let the secret be between
her and himself!

but that was not her father's way. once before pollie had hoped her
father would not tell her mother something, but she soon found her
mother knew all about it.

"mother's as safe to trust as i am," he said then, "and i never keep
anything from her, nor she from me. it's a safe rule, pollie, and a
happy one."

they jogged along in silence for a few minutes. the hill was stiff, and
her father got out to walk.

when he drew up at the door, and came to lift her down, he said
soberly, "there is such a text as 'honour thy father and thy "mother,"'
pollie; we must not forget that!"

"why, my dear!" exclaimed her mother when she got in. "i've sent jim
down the field-path to meet you!"

"i've come up with father; he's putting up the horse. mother, i waited
to speak to the vicar, and i'll tell you all about it! only—mother, i
do believe i never was so hungry in all my life!"

"well, here's tea," smiled her mother comfortably, "and while you eat
it, you can tell me!"

       *       *       *       *       *

through a mistake at the post office, harry fulbert only got that
letter at his london hotel the very day he was to sail for china.

to go? impossible!

to stay? equally impossible!

those were his first and second thoughts. then slowly he turned and
looked round the room.

almost everything was packed; his cases had gone on board the p. and o.
boat three days ago; his portmanteau lay open at his feet; nothing but
a few last purchases had to be made.

his passage in that special boat had long been taken, his friends would
turn up at the appointed time at tilbury to wave him good-bye. he had
parted from his mother—how could he alter now?

he stood with his elbow on the mantelshelf, looking at mary's picture,
and then suddenly, he walked over to the door, and turned the key in
the lock; and then, with another sudden movement, he threw himself on
his knees, and buried his head on his arms.

was he the true golden gold after all?

was he only giving way to his overwhelming disappointment? or was he
asking his best counsellor what he was to do in this sore crisis?

when he arose from his knees, he looked round once more. he put away
the photograph, locked his portmanteau, took up his hat and went out.

in another half-hour he was standing at the counter of the office of
the p. and o., anxiously asking, if there were any way of getting out
of going.

"i refused a gentleman, a mr. strong, this very morning," said the
agent. "every berth is filled up, and now it will probably be too late
for him."

harry fulbert asked eagerly if the agent knew the gentleman's address,
and upon its being produced, the cab was once more set going, and harry
found himself stopping at a mansion at the west end.

a few words of explanation introduced him to the would-be traveller,
whom he found in the midst of his luggage, having just returned from
his fruitless errand to the city.

mr. strong acknowledged he was anxious to exchange his berth, taken in
the next boat, for one in harry's, but the agent had assured him it was
too late now to arrange anything.

"but your luggage?" said mr. strong, when in a few hurried words they
had canvassed the whole subject, and arranged for an exchange of
tickets.

harry laughed.

"that i can do without till i follow it! i cannot tell you what a load
is taken from my heart!"

and the gentleman shook his hand warmly with a genial smile.

"i expect you are as glad to stay as i to go!"

harry was so overjoyed at the release, that it carried him over his
surprise and grief at mary's letter. now he would have the opportunity
to go back to her, and find out what she could mean by those few
hurried sentences, in which she had told him that she must give him up.

just now he was only anxious to enable his new friend to catch the
boat. there was little enough time, but he kept his cab while the last
few things were collected, and before long they were rolling together
to fenchurch street, "en route" for tilbury, the gentleman to start
on his long journey, and harry to meet his friends and tell them that
unexpected and pressing business detained him in england.

as to mary's letter he would not think of that! there must be some
mistake!

so while pollie was waiting with beating heart in the vicar's study to
tell her tale, harry was paying his bill at the hotel, and taking his
ticket at the great western station to a country village sixty miles
from london.

little did she think that the threads which seemed in such a hopeless
tangle were held in hands which knew the end of every one of them; nor
how surely out of the confusion was coming his perfect will for those
who trusted him so fully.

little did pollie think as she sat telling her mother all about it,
receiving her sympathy and finding it more comforting than she had
expected, that the subject of their thoughts was even now drawing
nearer and nearer to that moonlit village, as fast as the train could
bring him.

"mother, you are 'very' kind," said pollie gratefully, as she wished
her good-night. how glad she felt now that she had "honoured" her
mother from her heart, and not only obeyed "in the letter."

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter xii.

_off to london._

"where is uncle going?" exclaimed mary loveday the next morning, as she
and her aunt sat in the vicarage dining-room after breakfast.

"up to the mill, mary."

"oh, auntie, how kind of him, so early!"

"we were young ourselves once, mary," she said; "and besides—"

mary had been very brave, but at the kind tone she broke down. she had
no mother into whose arms she might throw herself, and sob out her
grief. perhaps her aunt felt that, for she came over to her, and put
her arm round her shoulders.

"it will surely come right in the end, if we trust it to god, mary,"
she said gently, "but this suspense is a sore trial for you."

"it is not exactly suspense," said mary brokenly "because—except for
god having it in hand—it is too late. my letter must have reached him
before he sailed yesterday, and he has sent me no answer."

her aunt was silent. it was a great perplexity, and gave her more
heartache than she liked to acknowledge.

but mary raised her head.

"aunt, i'm not going to think how hopeless it is. pollie said, 'it
couldn't happen without god's will,' and that is true. i am not going
to grieve any more."

she was walking by faith, and not by sight. she had hold of her
father's hand, and knew that, come rain or shine, she was being led "by
the right way."

would she be able to thank him by-and-by for even this dark bit?

in an hour the vicar returned, and he came at once to where his wife
and mary were sitting working.

"i'm going to london," he said, "by the two o'clock train. and if you
are well enough, mary, i am going to take you for the little jaunt with
me, to give you a change."

"i? oh, uncle!"

"yes, you! and i thought there was another little body that would be
pleased to go to london, so i've done a bold thing, my dear," turning
to his wife. "i've asked mary at the mill to bear our mary company for
two days. i like that girl! she's as true as steel—or what is it, mary?
something better than steel, eh?"

"asked mary at the mill?" echoed mrs. loveday, astonished. "did her
father like her to go?"

"yes, to be sure, he did! why not? it was her mother who hesitated, but
i think that was about a hat or something."

"'just let her put on what she comes to church in on sundays,' i said,
'and she will be all right. she is always neat, and what do you want
more?'"

"where will she meet us, uncle?" asked mary. "will she come here, or go
to the station?"

"yes, come here at half-past one. i said i would drive you both in the
trap."

so mary ran up to make her few preparations, and then, till lunch
should be ready, she went out into the garden, glad to be quiet for a
few minutes. what did her uncle mean by this sudden journey to london?
and how could it be of any use if harry had already sailed?

while pollie was turning over her drawers at the mill, trembling with
excitement, and wondering whether her things would be good enough to
do honour to her dear miss mary, mary herself, ready for her journey,
stood looking into the stream at the bottom of her uncle's garden, and
wondering what her journey to london would bring forth.

she had longed to be alone that she might recollect once more that she
had given all up into her lord's hands, and was going patiently to wait
till he should do his will.

how still the water was. how silently it flowed on and on; how clear
its depths; how bright its reflections when it caught the sunlight.

mary was fond of turning to-day's sights and sounds into little lessons
of love set by her heavenly master, so she thought now that she would
wish to be as the stream, deep and still in the shade, and bright and
praise-giving in the sunshine.

"i want to 'please' jesus," she said, with a happy smile, turning away
now she had had a glimpse, by faith, of her saviour, "and he knows
that!"

people often wondered why miss loveday had such an influence among her
class of girls.

but some one had once said to her, "never be satisfied in the day till
you have seen jesus!" and this was her secret.

so if a cloud arose, she tried to have a moment's quiet to get a
sight of her saviour, and having had that sight, she went on her way
rejoicing.

so she turned from the stream and left its singing waters behind, with
their shadows and sunshine, and made her way back to the house, ready
to enliven her aunt, or meet pollie, or do anything happily that came
to hand.


meanwhile pollie was wishing her mother good-bye at the mill, and
feeling as if, even for two days' absence, the parting was harder
than she could bear. she tried to say everything, and ended in saying
nothing. she wanted to tell her mother that she was sorry she had been
so tiresome lately, but the words stuck in her throat and made a sort
of ball there. she wanted to beg jim to do everything for her mother,
even better than she had, but instead she only got out the words,
"don't forget to water my plants!"

and then she found herself running down the field-path as if she were
pursued, with her eyes so blinded that she nearly went headlong in her
best clothes.

at last she paused at the stile at the bottom, and just as she was
going to spring over it, she met the vicarage maid hurrying up.

"pollie," she exclaimed, "miss mary wants to see you!"

"why, i was coming!" said pollie, surprised. "it isn't late, is it?"

"no—not late, only—"

pollie had swallowed her tears. the maid did not explain, but seemed in
a great hurry to get back, so pollie followed her in silence, inwardly
wondering why miss loveday had sent to meet her, but concluding it
might be because she feared that she might be late for the train.

at the vicarage gate the trap was already standing waiting. was she
late after all?

as they entered the hall door, mary ran out from the drawing-room
and took pollie by both hands, drawing her into the dining-room and
shutting the door.

"pollie!" she said. "shall you be dreadfully disappointed if we do not
go to london after all?"

"why, no, dear miss loveday, if you would rather not!"

"uncle says you and i shall go another time, if possible," she said
hurriedly, "but such a strange thing has happened, pollie! he's come—"

pollie was just going to ask who, but something in miss loveday's face
made it unnecessary.

"harry?" she asked, and then crimsoned at her familiarity. "mr.
fulbert—i mean?"

"yes."

mary sat down, still holding her little friend's hands; and then she
disengaged one, and stroked the glowing cheeks softly, while she said,
as if she could say nothing else, "how nice you look, dear! and how
kind of your mother to spare you! i cannot bear that you should not
go—and yet—"

"i do not mind a bit—not a bit, if you are glad, miss loveday!"

mary paused for a moment, and then she said, looking down and speaking
softly, "it has been so wonderful, pollie, that i can hardly believe
it. but you have been such a dear little friend to me that i should
like to tell you all about it."

she took off pollie's hat and gloves, she folded her necktie, but still
she did not seem as if she could begin.

at length she said, in a low tone, "i went down to the stream this
morning to have a little quiet time alone. i wanted to tell god all
about it, pollie—to ask him to take every bit of anxiety away about all
this, and to take charge of everything for us, so that we might know
that he had it in hand.

"while i was there, and while my uncle was finishing up a few things
before he started, a stranger came to the door and asked for him, and
sent in his card—mr. filbert.

"yes, pollie, it was harry! he did not get my letter till he was just
starting for china, and then he could not bear to go. and i do not
know yet how he managed it all, but he found somebody to exchange his
passage, and the gentleman went to china instead of him, and he came
here!"

"oh, miss loveday!" exclaimed pollie, with her face glowing. "and is
he—is he the true golden gold?"

"how could you think anything else, pollie? i 'knew' he was!"

"and will mr. loveday allow it now?" asked pollie longingly.

"harry does not wish it to be settled till he has sent for his mother,
but my uncle is perfectly satisfied. he said, pollie, that he knew 'the
true ring' when he heard it."

pollie did not know what "the true ring" meant; and before she could
ask, miss loveday had risen.

"harry is talking to my aunt, and i must go and put on my hat. he is
going back by our train, pollie, to meet his mother in london. he will
telegraph for her at the station; and he says he knows she will come.
she is staying near london, and they may be back here to-night. i am
going to drive him to the station, only i wanted to see you first."

mary stooped and kissed her little friend.

"i shall never forget what a comfort you have been to me, nor all that
you have done for me," she added gratefully. "it was you who won my
uncle to think it was possible there might be a mistake!"

"i had better go back home, dear miss loveday," said pollie. "i am so
glad that we had not started."

"so am i. but we will go to town another day, pollie."

pollie set off homewards, and just as she got to the stile, she heard
wheels, and in a moment, before she could disengage her dress from a
nail which had caught it, mary and mr. fulbert were close upon her, as
the vicar's fleet pony took them quickly past. not too fast, however,
for pollie not to recognise, in her dear miss loveday's friend, some
one whom she had seen before, and knew long ago to be the true golden
gold!



[illustration]

chapter xiii.

_pollie recognises a friend._

"mother!" exclaimed pollie, running over the green in front of the mill
and throwing herself into her mother's arms, "i haven't gone! but it's
all right. there is no need to go now."

"you don't say so?" asked her mother. "i am glad, but i expect you are
rather disappointed, my dear!"

"no, i'm not; i'm too glad to care on my own account. and, besides, i
could not bear to leave you, mother."

"foolish little girl!" said her mother fondly, but there were tears in
her eyes as she said it. perhaps she felt at that moment rewarded for
all the love and care she had expended on her wayward child.

"and, mother," pollie went on unconsciously, "such a wonderful thing
has happened. come in, and i will tell you."

they entered the mill together, and pollie went to put away her best
hat, wondering if it could be true that it was only an hour since she
had put it on with such care for her visit to london.

when she came back into the kitchen, her mother was getting out some
teacups.

"come along, my dear," she said in her cosy way; "you had but a
mouthful of dinner before you started, and i daresay you will not be
sorry to see a cup of tea. i shall not, myself, i am sure; and then you
can tell me your tale."

pollie thought that there was nobody in the world so comfortable as her
mother, and sat down by the fire with a very contented face.

"well, my dear?" asked her mother, smiling at her.

"oh, such a wonderful thing!" exclaimed pollie again. "do you remember,
two years ago, when i was at aunt elizabeth's?"

"i remember that very well—and so do you," answered her mother.

"yes—; and do you remember i told you about the gentleman that was
preaching there, and how good he was, and how interesting?"

"yes, i remember that."

"well, mother, 'he' is mr. harry fulbert! no need for anybody to send
up to london to ask about him now, for the moment i saw him driving by
the side of her i knew him again. he's the one that—that brought me to
christ, mother; and now, if you will let me, i want to go back and tell
the vicar. may i, mother?"

"i'll think about it. but you are sure, pollie?"

"'sure?'" asked pollie. "i should know him anywhere. i could never
forget him, never."

then pollie explained all about mr. fulbert's coming, and about the
postponed visit, and the afternoon slipped away so fast that it was
nearly her father's tea-time before she had finished.

when he came in, he did not see any objection to pollie's paying
the vicar another visit, and himself accompanied her down the hill,
promising to wait for her at her uncle brown's till she should have
made her call.

the vicar was standing at his door with his hat on. he greeted pollie
very kindly, and asked her if she would walk up the road with him, as
he had just been called to a village two miles up the valley to see a
dying man, and he could not venture to wait.

"life and death are awful things, pollie," he said solemnly. "life
without christ is hopeless enough, but death—"

they walked along in silence for some time, till the vicar said
suddenly:

"you wanted to speak to me."

then pollie told him about it, and was quite surprised at the vicar's
gratitude.

"i call you a very kind little friend," he said, when she had finished.
"it is not that i doubted him in the very least after the talk i had
with him, but to find that my master has honoured and blessed him by
giving him 'souls for his hire' makes me more glad than i can say. mary
was quite right, you see, in saying that there could be no mistake in
such an one as he. she 'knew' it was all right."

so pollie retraced her steps a happy girl, and found her father deep in
a political discussion with his brother, and not having found the time
at all long.

"so you've never been to london after all!" he said, as she took his
arm affectionately, and they turned homewards.

"no," said pollie, shaking her head, "but that can wait. i never was so
happy and grateful, i do believe, father! at least, never since that
day at aunt elizabeth's. of course that was the happiest day."

her father nodded emphatically.

"it's a wondrous thing to be allowed to carry the king's messages,"
he said thoughtfully, referring to harry fulbert. "perhaps some of us
would be trusted with more of them if we were more willing!"


meanwhile the lamp was lighted, and mary and her aunt sat working in
the pretty vicarage drawing-room.

the train could not come in till after nine that night. and unless
harry had sped wonderfully well, he and his mother could not arrive
even by that.

but he had sped wonderfully well. his mother had been at home when the
telegram reached her, and had prepared to start back with him as soon
as he desired.

"i shall telegraph to you, anyway," he had said to mary, as they were
driving to the station, "then you will know when to expect us."

they sat very silent.

mary's aunt was thinking of the change it would be to them all if mary
should go to china. and as to mary, she was praying that the happiness
which had come into her life might never make a cloud between her and
her lord.

she had said something of that sort to harry that afternoon, and he had
answered, "you cannot desire that more than i do, mary. i want him to
be first to both of us."

mrs. loveday was called away to attend to the needs of some villager,
and was detained some time. when she came back, mary was sitting where
she had left her, but her work had dropped on the floor, and instead,
she was studying a pink piece of paper which had arrived during her
aunt's absence.

"here it is, auntie," said mary, springing up. "just read it yourself."

  "all well; my mother and i just starting from paddington."

how cheerful it all looked when at half-past nine o'clock the wheels
were heard on the drive, and the travellers walked into the room!

mrs. loveday went forward to greet her guest, and one look into the
sweet placid face, beaming with love and hopefulness, was enough to
satisfy her.

"where is mary?" mrs. fulbert asked, and held out her arms. "i have
wanted a daughter all my life, and now i shall have one!"

"you will indeed," said the vicar heartily. "harry must forgive all
the trouble we have given him, in the blessing of having our mary for
his own. i was convinced this morning that i might happily give her to
him, but since then i have had most unexpected confirmation, and i have
nothing to say but to thank god that my brother's child has found such
a helpmeet."

such a supper table as that was! mrs. fulbert sat with "her two
children" by her, and when she looked at the face of one, she turned
and looked into the face of the other with a mute appeal that touched
them both very much.

"i was coming to see you directly harry had sailed," she said once,
"but i was not very well. little did i think that you could have had
all this to go through."

"it has been all for the best," said mary, gently. "i would not have it
different."

"nor i," said harry, smiling. "but for this, i should have been on my
way to china!"

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter xiv.

_"i never thought of it!"_

"harry! i shall never be able to spare you both," said his mother,
looking at him earnestly, when, after supper, the vicar and his wife
had left the three together to have a quiet talk. "can you not come
home again and settle down with me in my old age? i have enough for you
both."

harry took her hand in his, that dear thin hand that had guided him all
those thirty years. after a pause, he said gravely—

"it shall be as you wish, mother. how can i refuse you anything
to-night? somebody else will be glad of my post in china, i suppose."

his mother smiled peacefully, with a little naïve nod at mary.

"it never suited his health, and he will not be sorry in a few months.
there is plenty to do at exeter, and we shall be very happy and very
busy, eh, my harry?"

and when she wished mary good-night, she said softly, "the lord has
given me this day my heart's desire."

mary kissed her affectionately, but she made no reply. for herself she
was glad enough for harry to give up his post in china, but she feared
that he would be very disappointed.

mrs. fulbert looked into her face questioningly.

"you do not think me selfish, i hope, my dear?"

"no—oh, no!"

"you can hardly look at it with my eyes," she said, smiling, holding
mary's hands between her own, as if to impress her words. "i always
said that no money compensated in my estimation for such separations
as residence in foreign countries involves. of course, if you go as a
missionary, that is a different thing; for christ's sake we may have to
forsake all that we have, but harry had that situation before he knew
what it was to belong to christ, and so—"

she paused, for harry was standing by them, looking intently into her
face while she was speaking.

"'for christ's sake'?" he echoed slowly. "i never thought of that. i
had my situation, and it never occurred to me to be a missionary!"

"it has 'occurred' to you to do work for christ out there, harry," said
mary earnestly, "for you told me of several people that you had helped.
is not that being a missionary?"

"i never thought of it," he said again thoughtfully and even solemnly.

mrs. fulbert had turned very pale. surely her heart's desire, which she
thought a moment ago her lord had given her, was not going to be taken
away by her own suggestion?

mary stood very still, for she guessed that a crisis was going on in
both the hearts before her. what would be the end of it all? what a
revolution his mother's words might cause in all their lives!

at last harry turned, and fondly put his arm round his mother.

"i have promised to do as you wish," he said, "and so we will leave it.
if my lord has any other plan for me, he will show it in his own time."

mrs. fulbert looked in his face.

"harry, i cannot say, 'thy will, "not mine" be done,' to-night, but he
will enable me, i feel sure."

she kissed them both in silence and left the room.

"mary!" exclaimed harry. "my mother's words have turned me upside down!
what shall we do?"

"our lord will show us," said mary, "and i do not think we have to
settle it to-night, have we, harry? perhaps the light will be clearer
to-morrow."

and the lonely mother upstairs, who had had her heart's desire so near
her, knelt in beseeching prayer in her chamber, not asking so much that
she might have her will, as that she should be willing from her heart
to have god's will.

the clock struck several hours, and still her wakeful eyes could find
no rest, till at last, a thought came swiftly and sweetly over her with
soothing balm, "'commit' thy way unto the lord; trust also in him," and
yielding to his will, she slept.

mary was down the first on the following morning, and was busy
preparing the breakfast when mrs. fulbert came in.

"am i too early?" she asked, as she came forward.

"oh, no," said mary, kissing her affectionately. "i wonder how you
slept, after all the excitement of yesterday?"

"pretty well, dear. it was a long while before i could give him up,
mary, but i did at last. i will take god's will, whichever way it is,
and trust him."

"i am so glad," said mary simply. then, as if she could not help it,
she gave mrs. fulbert another kiss, and added: "i know what it means,
but it is such peace afterwards!"

perhaps harry understood at his first glance at his mother's face, for
no further mention was made of the subject for the present, and mr. and
mrs. loveday were not yet aware either of the change of harry's plans,
nor of the fresh thought which his mother's words had put into their
minds.


after breakfast, mary and he set out to carry some of her aunt's jelly
to a sick man, and as their road lay near the mill, mary left harry
sitting on the stile while she ran in to see pollie.

pollie was sitting outside the mill, paring apples for a pie, and soon
saw her dear teacher coming. she ran down to meet her, and asked if she
would come in.

"not to-day, dear, because harry is waiting. but, pollie, i wanted to
tell you something, and to ask you to pray—"

pollie raised her eyes expectantly. it was not the first time by a good
many that she and miss loveday had "agreed" to pray.

"when we were talking last night, harry's mother asked him not to
go back to china—i mean not to stay—of course, he must go back till
there is someone to take his place; and he promised he would do as she
wished—"

"oh, miss loveday!"

"and then she said half a word about it being different if any one
went to china as a missionary. and, mary, before we any of us knew,
something had happened that could never be undone. harry had seen that
it might be that he should go to china as a missionary, and his mother
saw that the very thing which she dreaded—the separation from her only
son—might after all be a duty which she could not evade."

pollie's eyes were gazing intently into her friend's face.

"did he say?" she asked.

"no, not yet; but—"

"i'll pray," said pollie earnestly. "i am sure god will make it plain,
dear miss loveday."

"yes, so am i; only, pollie, i feel as if i wanted to 'see!'"

"don't you remember that little story you told us last sunday?" said
pollie, half-smiling.

"which?" asked mary.

"don't you remember? about the little child going a journey in the
dark? you said he did not know the way in the least, and yet he was
not a bit anxious or worried, he knew he would get home at last,
just as surely as if he were stepping over the doorway. but that was
not because he was strong or wise, but only just for one very simple
reason—his father's lantern lighted, the 'next' step, and he had hold
of his father's hand."

mary's eyes were full, and so were pollie's to match. so full that they
did not notice a shadow fall upon them from some one who had come up
close.

"i will think of that," said mary; "thank you, my little pollie, for
reminding me."

"and i will think of that," said harry, who was standing behind them.
"he will show the next step, pollie, will he not?"

so before long "the next step" seemed to be that harry must go back to
china and wait for the filling of his post.

how quickly that week sped away!

near the end of it, mary and mrs. fulbert accompanied harry to london
to see him off on his long journey; and pollie, to her great delight,
was asked to go too.

so at last pollie did go to london, and for the two days that elapsed
before harry sailed, she saw more sights than she had imagined it
possible could be seen in the time. anyone watching those four going
about would have said that they were perfectly happy. and so indeed
they were, though now and then the parting which was in front of them
seemed to pass like a cloud over the brightness of the landscape.

not a word more had been said about the missionary project. by
universal consent the subject was dropped. the four were praying about
it, but even harry and mary did not mention it to each other.

mary had often watched harry's face questioningly, but though he
understood, he did not seem prepared to talk of it. but the last
evening came at length, and still nothing had been settled.

"mother," said harry, as they all stood at the window in the hotel at
gravesend, "have you thought any more about my being a missionary?"

mrs. fulbert turned rather pale, but she put her hand very calmly on
her son's arm.

"i should not like to keep you back, my dear, if god called you."

"what do you think, mary?" he said, turning to look into her face. "i
have not asked you before, because i wanted for us all to do nothing in
a hurry."

"i am willing either way," said mary, "but—"

"what is the 'but'?" he asked tenderly.

"we are young," she said, leaning her head on mrs. fulbert's shoulder,
"and we have each other—but you—"

mrs. fulbert stroked her face softly.

"thank you, my dear, for thinking of me."

harry was watching them both intently, and as his mother spoke, he bent
towards mary and whispered, "you are right; and i love you more than
ever for being good to my mother! mary, i see the next step now. when i
come back, if god spares us, we will stay a year with our dear mother.
she will be 'our' dear mother then, you know; and after that—"

"after that, if god points out the way, i will let you go happily, or
go with you!" said mrs. fulbert. "i am not too old yet to travel, if
need be," she added, smiling a little.

"oh, mother," said harry, "how sweet you are! to think that we may be
permitted to carry the unsearchable riches of christ to some of the
millions of china!"

that was a memorable evening to them all, and in one young heart a seed
sank down to spring up and bear fruit in after days.

when pollie went into her little room that night, she knelt in silence
for a long time by her bedside, but the prayer that went up from her
full heart was this:

"here am i. send me, send me!"

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter xv.

_visitors at shanklin._

the parting was over. mary, very pale but more thoughtful of the frail
mother than of herself, kept up bravely, and no one would have guessed
the desolate feeling which came over her as the beautiful steamer
became every moment more and more a speck on the waters.

"it will not be long before he is with us again, god willing,"
whispered mrs. fulbert.

"no," answered mary. but her heart went straight as an arrow to her
abiding-place, and found its best rest in the unchangeable love of
jesus.

   "hope had laid her anchor,
      found her rest,
    in the sure calm haven
      of his breast."

they both had dreaded to go back to the hotel, and decided to pack up
as quickly as possible and to travel home. but when they entered the
familiar rooms, there sat the vicar and his wife, looking as natural as
if they had been there for days.

it did not take long to explain that they had come to town to try
to persuade mrs. fulbert and mary to go with them to a southern
watering-place for a little change of scene, while they also bore
a letter from pollie's mother containing a permission for her to
accompany them.

"i am afraid i shall be in the way, dear miss loveday," said pollie,
blushing; "and if so, please do not think of it. i can be put into the
train, and go home by myself, i know."

but nobody would hear of this, and then mr. loveday acknowledged that
he had already arranged for rooms, which were only waiting for them to
travel to when they felt inclined.

so the next day, they found themselves sitting at tea within sight of
the sea at shanklin, a happy party of five.

"pollie," said mary that evening, as they stood on the esplanade and
felt the salt spray blow in their faces, "you are my little friend, you
know, who understands more about me than anybody in the world—more than
harry even—and you must learn to call me mary. i think of you as a dear
little sister."

pollie did not answer; she only squeezed her arm very tightly.

"say you will, dear."

"i'll try," whispered pollie, "but whatever i call you, it will not
alter my love."


the next morning, to pollie's intense surprise, she found a letter from
her father on her plate at breakfast.

on opening it, she gave such a start that mary asked what was the
matter.

"my cousins—the browns—from chichester are staying here in a house on
the cliff!"

"well, are you glad?" asked mary.

"i suppose i am. i hardly know," said pollie, a little soberly. then,
after a few moments' silence, she added, "if they get to know you i
shall be, because you will do them good."

so mary and she had some talk about them, and pollie told her a little
of their life at chichester, and of the gay, unsatisfactory circle they
were in. of her cousin's acquaintance with h. f. she said nothing, as
she felt it was not her secret.

"you must go up to call on them presently. perhaps they do not know you
are here," concluded mary, as they got up from their seat in the chine
and made their way back to their lodgings.

"perhaps not," said pollie; "if they do not know, they will think i
have dropped from the skies."

"so you have," smiled mary.

so pollie set forth, and soon found herself knocking at the door of a
handsome house where her cousins were lodging.

fortunately, for her comfort, her father had written to them also,
telling them of pollie's presence in shanklin.

clara received her with open arms, and led her straight into the
garden, where her aunt elizabeth was sitting. they were both loud in
their praises of how pollie had grown, and how she had improved.

presently her aunt went indoors, saying she would send laura out, and
before clara had time to say something she was evidently longing to do,
there was a slow soft step on the gravel behind them, and laura stood
leaning on the end of the garden seat.

clara got up and gave her sister her seat, and threw herself on the
grass beside them, looking down across the lawn to the view of the sea
over the trees.

pollie's eyes wandered several times to laura's face, but they came
back again unsatisfied.

laura looked as pretty as ever, but there was a transparency about
her that reminded pollie of a young girl who had died of consumption
in their village. she was so taken up with this thought that she made
quite a muddle of explaining how she came to be at shanklin, and who
miss loveday was.

"isn't that the name of that old lady you and my father used to be so
devoted to?" asked clara, puzzled.

"that was my miss loveday's aunt," said pollie. "you will like to know
her, i mean my miss mary, she is so awfully nice."

clara laughed, but added more warmly, "well, i'll come down and make
her acquaintance. i'm moped to death here, with laura coughing all the
time. there will be some fun now you're here!"

so pollie stayed for half an hour and then went back, clara
volunteering to accompany her down the hill.

pollie looked towards laura, but clara said she would be all right till
she came back, and took up her hat and ran off down the garden.

"the fact is," she said abruptly, when they turned into the road, "i
wanted to have a little talk with you about laura. we've never heard
another word from h. f. since you left, nearly a year ago. of course
the friends he was staying with hear from him, i suppose, but he has
never sent even a message to laura—"

"i am so sorry," said pollie, "i wish—"

"what's the use of wishing," said clara bitterly. "it has broken her
heart. i see it all now, and if we had not been so secret over it, i
daresay it would not have happened. at any rate, she would not have
taken it to heart like this. as to me, i'm utterly miserable."

"cannot you tell aunt elizabeth or uncle?" urged pollie gently. "you
would be so much happier."

clara shook her head, and then added, "sometimes, i think i must, but
laura will not hear of it."

"does she think he will come back?" asked pollie.

"oh, no! there is a report that he is going to be married. laura has
never raised her head since that."

"poor laura!" said pollie.

"sometimes i have wished more than i can say to see you. i even asked
ma to write and invite you. but she said she did not see that it could
do laura any good."

"i wish i could," murmured pollie.

"i fancy you might. every day i see her getting weaker, and my heart is
really broken."

"but i could not help her," exclaimed pollie, "except—"

"yes, that's it!" said clara eagerly. "you have learned a secret that
we haven't. i thought that you might give her some of your comfort."

"can't you?" said pollie. "it is open to everyone. i mean jesus christ
is—"

clara had hold of her arm. she pressed it now with unusual affection.
"pollie, you do sometimes pray?"

"sometimes!" echoed pollie.

"well—would you—could you? i know we do not deserve it, but could you
pray for us?"

"of course i will, and so will miss mary."

"oh, don't tell her!"

"not anything you do not like. but if you want a blessing, why should
you mind our praying for it?"

clara turned very white, but she suddenly exclaimed:

"do as you think best. i'm so miserable! what if laura should die?"

"oh, do tell my aunt," urged pollie. "do, do, clara. you will find a
load gone when you do!"

they had reached pollie's home. clara refused to come in, and with a
passionate kiss on pollie's cheek she turned homewards, while pollie
with full heart went upstairs to find mary and tell her all about it.

[illustration]



[illustration]

chapter xvi.

_missionaries at home._

that evening after tea, mary and pollie set out for the cliff, mary to
carry a bunch of flowers to the invalid and pollie to ask her cousin
clara if she would go for a walk.

mrs. brown was out at the moment. thus mary found herself sitting
quietly with laura, the golden glory of the sunset lighting up the
culver cliffs and tipping the distant sails as they passed along the
horizon.

laura had been idly scanning the local paper, and her thin fingers
rested in it still.

"i was reading the names of the visitors here," she said. "there was no
one we know yesterday. clara and ma generally go out in the evening and
the time seems long."

"perhaps you will let me come and see you sometimes?" said mary. "we
expect to be here a fortnight."

"if you like," said laura listlessly. "ma is going home to-morrow and
clara will be very dull, as she says, with my cough."

she was still glancing at the paper, when suddenly a deep colour
spread over her face, and with an exclamation of dismay, she exclaimed
hurriedly:

"where's clara—oh, miss loveday, call clara!"

"she is out, dear. what is it?" said mary soothingly. "she will be back
directly."

laura's cough had come on with such violence that she could not answer,
but she pointed piteously to the list of visitors staying at one of the
hotels.

"mr. and mrs. henry fulbert," read mary—and then as by a flash, she
realized the whole story!

this was the h. f. to whom poor laura had given her heart; this was the
one against whom her uncle had warned her! the harry fulbert who was
not the true golden gold!

she took the invalid into her arms, stranger though she was, and
tried to comfort her with the comfort wherewith she herself had been
comforted of god.

"poor laura!" she whispered. "i see it all, but there is jesus left. he
healeth the broken in heart and bindeth up their wounds."

"my heart is broken," sobbed laura. "i have been disobedient to what ma
would have liked; i've kept a secret from her all this year. he told me
he would come back and ask me, and now he has gone and married someone
else! i had heard he was going to, but i would not believe it!"

"poor laura!" again said the soft, soothing voice. "let us tell the
lord jesus all about it, and come to him for forgiveness. indeed,
'indeed' he will comfort you if you will let him!"

"i do not know anything about him," said laura, as she allowed mary to
lay her on the sofa, and then she buried her head in the cushions and
cried as if her heart would break.

"it makes me cough to cry," she moaned; "and i am so miserable! so
miserable!"

"can you bear to tell me all about it?" asked mary, guessing that if
she could bring herself to speak it out she would feel better.

but laura only shook her head and lay sobbing and coughing.

"you will do yourself harm," said mary at last. "i fear for you if you
give way to grief like this—"

"and well you may," said laura, turning round upon her, and looking at
her with pathetic eyes. "ma doesn't guess it, nor clara either, but i'm
dying—and i've no hope—none!"

oh, how thankful mary was that she knew the hope herself, and could
tell the shrinking invalid of him who has borne our griefs and carried
our sorrows, and with whose stripes we are healed!

"he loves 'me?'" questioned laura, as she lay on her pillows utterly
exhausted. "can he love me who has never given him a thought, except to
turn away from him; who has said in her heart she would do without him?"

"indeed he does," said mary tenderly. "'while we were yet sinners,
christ died for us.' that seems so wonderful, doesn't it, but so nice?"

laura lay very still. the room grew darker and darker, but the others
did not come back, and mary was thankful for it.

at last, laura put out her trembling hand. "i can never thank you," she
whispered. "would you mind kissing me?"

mary bent over her. "you have let jesus comfort you?" she asked
tenderly. "it is not only mine, is it, dear?"

"oh, no!" she responded earnestly. "but it is only just in time—"

at the moment mrs. brown came bustling in.

"ma, dear," said laura faintly, "come here."

there was some inexplicable change in the voice, something which even
in the half darkness made a cold chill fall on that gay mother's heart.

"ma, dear," she went on as mrs. brown came close, "you will hear all
when i am gone, clara will tell you. i've gone astray like a lost
sheep, but jesus christ has found me. will you forgive me?"

mrs. brown knelt down by her side, kissing her in an awestruck manner,
and for a moment she felt two feeble arms round her neck, and then they
relaxed their hold, and slowly fell back. laura had gone where all
tears are wiped from off all faces.

       *       *       *       *       *

pollie's little story is done—or perhaps not much more than begun.

the links, which were riveted in all that time of trouble, were a chain
which no time or circumstance could break.

harry—mary's harry—came back from china in a few months' time, and very
soon he and mary were married and went to exeter for the promised year.

pollie went to her home, to be the sunshine of her father and mother
and jim, waiting and working, ever with the view in her inmost heart of
obeying her lord's command to "go" to tell of his unsearchable riches
to those who have never heard.

clara went back to chichester an altered girl, leaving that grave
behind her as a lasting memorial of their sorrowful deception.

mrs. brown was stunned by the sudden blow of her daughter's death, and
for years would only refer to the matter by a cold "i never acted like
that myself, and i do not understand it."

all that time clara's patience and love were severely taxed, but she
came out of the ordeal as gold purified seven times.

and there came a day at last when her faith and patience were rewarded,
and mrs. brown acknowledged with humbled spirit that she too needed a
saviour, and if jesus had made clara what she was, she might well trust
him.



                        [illustration: finis]








*** end of the project gutenberg ebook just in time ***


    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™

project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.

the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.

﻿the project gutenberg ebook of the house with the silver door
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: the house with the silver door

author: eva march tappan

illustrator: emily hall chamberlain

release date: october 11, 2025 [ebook #77025]

language: english

original publication: boston: houghton mifflin company, 1913

credits: mary glenn krause, david e. brown, and the online distributed proofreading team at https://www.pgdp.net (this file was produced from images generously made available by the internet archive/american libraries.)


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook the house with the silver door ***





this ebook was created in honour of distributed proofreaders’
25th anniversary.




by eva march tappan

  the house with the silver door.
  when knights were bold.
  dixie kitten.
  an old, old story-book.
  the chaucer story book.
  letters from colonial children.
  american hero stories.
  the story of the roman people.
  the story of the greek people.
  the golden goose and other fairy tales.
  the christ story.
  old ballads in prose.

all of the above are illustrated.


houghton mifflin company

boston and new york




the house with the silver door


  [illustration:           (p. 30)
  the children told the moon lady]




  the house with the
  silver door

  by
  eva march tappan

  with illustrations

  [illustration]

  boston and new york
  houghton mifflin company
  the riverside press cambridge
  1913




copyright, 1913, by eva march tappan

all rights reserved

_published september 1913_




contents


    i. the house with the silver door      1

   ii. king hansel the first              67

  iii. the star princess                 129




illustrations


  the children told the moon lady      _frontispiece_

  silverboy called, “who’s there?”                 52

  a great coarse hand pulled him in                94

  “she is fairer than any of my maidens”          158

        _from drawings by emily hall chamberlain._




the house with the silver door




the house with the silver door


once upon a time a man and his wife lived in a cottage in the forest,
so far away that no one could think how far it was even if he tried for
a month. they had two children, a boy and a girl. there was only one
thing more that they wanted, and that was a silver door to the cottage.

“how i should like to have a silver door,” said the goodman, “so i
could see the sun shine upon it at sunset when i came in from my work!”

“how i should like to have a silver door,” said the goodwife. “i should
draw in the latchstring at night, and go to sleep thinking, ‘my door is
made of silver, and how it will shine when the sun strikes it in the
morning.’”

the children had heard this every day since they could remember, and
when they had grown older, they determined to go away and see if they
could not find a silver door for their father and mother.

very early one morning, long before their parents were awake, silverboy
and silvergirl, for those were their names, took hold of each other’s
hand and went softly out of the cottage and far away. they climbed over
fallen trees, they waded through brooks and mossy pools, they were
caught in the briers, and they scrambled down breakneck cliffs. after
a long time they came to the edge of the forest, but nowhere had they
seen what they were looking for.

“what shall we do?” cried silvergirl, sobbing. “i’m afraid we shall
never find a silver door.”

silverboy might have cried, too, if he had been alone, but now he
plucked up his courage and answered bravely:--

“oh, we’ll find it yet.”

“but we don’t even know where to look for it.”

“do you see that great oak tree, the one with so many knots? i saw a
squirrel run into a hole in the trunk just now. maybe he’s the wizard
squirrel himself, and i mean to ask him if he will tell us where to go.”

“oh, don’t,” pleaded silvergirl. “i am afraid he might hurt you.”

“some wizards are bad,” declared silverboy as wisely as if he had gone
fishing with wizards every day of his life, “but some are good, and i’m
almost sure that this is a good one.” then he went under the tree and
called softly:--

“squirrel, squirrel, are you the wizard squirrel?”

“wizard yourself!” scolded the squirrel, making up a comical face at
him. “i wish you’d keep quiet; i want to eat my supper.”

“but won’t you please tell us where to look for a silver door?” begged
silverboy.

“in the place where they keep them, of course,” retorted the wizard
squirrel, for it was really he himself.

“won’t you please tell us where that is?” silverboy persisted.

“perhaps it is in the moon,” declared the wizard squirrel meditatively.
“it looks as if there was a good deal of silver up there. why don’t you
ask the moon king?” he added, dropping a bit of nutshell directly upon
silverboy’s nose. “now, run away; you ask too many questions. squirrels
never ask questions at suppertime.”

“but we can’t get to the moon,” said silverboy sadly.

“no more can you get to me,” retorted the wizard squirrel, “but you
won’t stop talking to me.” and with a whisk of his bushy tail he
slipped out of sight into his hole.

“he means that we shall call to the moon,” said silvergirl.

they went out from the forest to an open field to watch for the moon,
and soon it shone down clear and bright, and they cried:--

“o moon, moon, won’t you please help us and tell us where to find a
silver door?”

but the moon sailed on among the little clouds and answered never a
word. right behind the children, however, they heard a funny little
chattering. it was the wizard squirrel, and he called:--

“you are real moon calves! i never told you to call out in that
fashion. i’ve thought of something. what will you do for me if i tell
you which way to go to find a silver door?”

“i’ll give you a great pile of nuts,” said silverboy.

“ho, nuts, indeed!” declared the wizard squirrel. “i can get nuts
myself, and i can go to the very tops of trees that you wouldn’t think
of climbing.”

“i’ll do anything you say,” promised silverboy eagerly.

“there’s just one thing that you can do for me,” said the wizard
squirrel. “i don’t want the all-alone axe to cut down the ancient oak,
and if you will go to the mountain over there and get him to promise to
let it alone, you will be started on the right way to find the silver
door. if he won’t do it, you may as well go home, for you’ll never find
your door if you hunt till the skies fall. i can’t stop to talk with
moon calves any longer,” and in a flash he was gone.

“shall we do it?” asked silvergirl; and her brother replied stoutly,
“yes, come on, and let us climb the mountain.”

so on they went, across the meadow and over the swamp and through the
thicket and up the side of the mountain. when they were halfway to the
top, they heard the sound of chopping. then they heard the fall of a
tree.

“that must be the all-alone axe,” said silverboy. “it sounds as if
it was over there, just behind the cliff. come, and we will find the
woodchopper and ask him not to cut down the ancient oak.”

they hurried around the cliff, but no woodchopper was there. nothing at
all was to be seen but a great axe chopping away all by its lone self.

“please, mr. all-alone axe,” said silverboy, rather timidly, for he had
never before seen an axe chopping away alone. “please, mr. all-alone
axe, will you tell us where the woodchopper is?”

“can’t you see?” demanded the all-alone axe sharply. “i’m chopping, and
i’m chopping wood. what more woodchopper do you want?” and he cut away
faster than ever.

the trees began to fall on the right and on the left, and silvergirl
was badly frightened. “oh, if we only could get away!” she thought; but
she called up all her courage and asked very politely:--

“is there anything we can do for you, mr. all-alone axe?”

“there’s a girl who knows an axe from a hatchet!” cried the all-alone
axe; and he was so pleased that he actually stopped cutting for at
least two minutes. “yes,” he added; “over on that mountain the gentle
giant lives, and after i have cut down some trees, he often comes and
drags them away. if you’ll make him promise to let my trees alone, i’ll
do whatever you want.”

“will you let the ancient oak stand?” asked silvergirl.

“i will,” replied the all-alone axe; so the children said good-bye and
started for the mountain where the gentle giant lived.

it was a long, long way. they had to make a little raft before they
could cross the river. they had to climb steep cliffs, to scramble down
into deep gullies, and to creep over slippery rocks. at last they were
well up the side of the gentle giant’s mountain; and now they began to
hear a loud rustling as if all the winds of the heavens were blowing
all the branches of all the trees. they caught hold of each other’s
hand and stood listening. pretty soon they heard, “ho-ho! ho-ho!” it
sounded like some one taking a deep breath, but it was almost if not
quite as loud as thunder. silverboy and silvergirl were so frightened
that they would surely have run off down the mountain had not the
gentle giant just then caught sight of them and roared out:--

“ho, there! stop, i say. i’m lonesome, i want to see you. come here and
talk to me.”

it was not of the least use to try to run away, for he had stretched
out two hands as big as pine trees, and in a moment he had silverboy in
his right hand and silvergirl in his left hand and was holding them up
before his eyes to get a better view of them.

“who are you?” he roared as softly as he could, for he was not one of
the hateful giants, but one of the good-natured sort. “where are you
going?”

“we’re going to find a silver door for the cottage,” shouted silverboy
as loud as ever he could.

“eh?” roared the gentle giant. “what’s that? talk a little louder,
can’t you?” and he held the children up to his ear.

then silvergirl screamed with all her might:--

“we’re going to find a silver door for the cottage.”

“that’s all right,” said the gentle giant, with a laugh that shook the
trees like a tempest. “i wonder if _she’d_ like a silver door,” he
added, trying to look through the trees to another mountain even higher
than his. “when you find your silver door, you might come up here and
tell me about it,” he said with a chuckle. “if you are going up on
_that_ mountain, i’ll carry you over the swamp and halfway up the hill.
i don’t dare to go any farther.”

“why, how could any one hurt _you_?” cried silverboy, taking hold of
the gentle giant’s ear with both hands and shouting into it.

the gentle giant seemed so good-natured that the children did not feel
one bit afraid; but now something happened that did frighten them, for
the giant began to cry, and he cried such floods of tears that they had
to cling to his fingers with all their might to keep from being washed
off and down the side of the mountain.

“i’m sorry as i can be,” said silvergirl. “don’t cry, mr. gentle
giant.” and silverboy called, “we’ll help you, and there shan’t anybody
hurt you.”

the gentle giant laughed till he was almost crying again, and he shook
so that the children had to hold on harder than ever. then he said:--

“come up on the mountain and see my house and eat dinner with me, will
you? i’m lonesome up there, and it isn’t often that i get any children
to come and play with me.”

of course they said yes, and he carried them carefully up the mountain
to the biggest house that they ever saw. it was built of logs, bigger
than any trees that grew in their own forest. the door was so high that
the clouds could have floated in as easy as anything. in one corner was
the bed. to make it, the giant had driven into the floor a stake, or
rather the trunk of a great pine tree. he had laid long rails from this
stake to the two walls, shutting in the corner. on top of the rails
were stout boughs, and on top of the boughs were whole barnfuls of soft
spruce and fir and hemlock branches, until there was as comfortable a
bed as was ever seen. for a table he had driven another tree trunk into
the middle of the floor. then he had split in two the biggest tree on
the mountain and had fastened it to the top of the trunk, the flat side
up. at one end of the room was the chimney, and that was large enough
to roast at least ten oxen, eleven deer, and fifteen bears, with plenty
of room between them for pigs and partridges.

“i don’t feel hungry to-day,” said the gentle giant, “so i put on
only five oxen, four deer, and three bears to roast, with perhaps
half a dozen little pigs; but now i have company, i’ll hang up a few
partridges, too, just for a relish.”

he hung a score or two of partridges in front of the fire, and when
they were done, he called the children to sit down and eat with him,
though at first it was rather hard to see how they could do it. he
put them on two of his wooden stools, but, stretch their necks as they
might, they could not see over the edge of the table.

“we’ll soon fix that,” declared the gentle giant.

he went to the end of the room, not more than a quarter of a mile away,
and brought back his tallest churn. he set it on the stool bottomside
up, and put silvergirl on top of it.

“i haven’t any other churn that is tall enough for you,” said the
giant, “but i’ll just bring in a pebble and put a cushion on it.”

so out of the door he went and soon came back with a stone in his hand
big enough for a doorstep. he set that up on the stool and laid a
cushion on top of it, and then they were ready for dinner.

“which will you have first,” he asked, “an ox or a bear?”

“could i have a partridge?” asked silvergirl.

“just as many of them as you want,” replied the giant. “in my country
we always ate the oxen and bears first; but you shall do as you like.”

so he gave each of the children some partridges, and then he himself
began on the oxen. one by one they disappeared, and the pile of bones
beside his plate grew higher and higher, till at last the children
could not see his face at all. through the bones, however, his great
voice came rumbling as he called: “aren’t you ready for your oxen yet,
or will you have a deer or two and a few little pigs?”

he did not wait for an answer, but piled up oxen and bears and deer and
pigs on the table before them.

“truly, mr. gentle giant,” declared silverboy, “we can’t eat any more.
couldn’t you eat these?”

“perhaps,” replied the giant, “though i don’t seem to have so much
appetite as usual. i’ll take just a bite or two more and then we’ll all
sit down under the trees and you can tell me where you are going and
what you know about silver doors. i know a lady who--i mean i might
want to find one myself some day.”

the gentle giant had already eaten the five oxen and the four deer, and
now he ate the three bears and the little pigs. “just one mouthful more
to leave a good taste,” he said, and in two minutes the rest of the
partridges were gone.

“now come out of doors,” he called, and led the way to the great door,
but the children did not follow him. “what’s the matter?” he asked.

“we can’t get down,” they replied.

the gentle giant laughed until the stars would have rattled in the sky
if it had been night. “i don’t have company of your size very often,”
he said, “and i forget my manners.” then he took silvergirl in one
great hand and silverboy in the other and carried them out under the
trees. “i’ll lie down on the moss,” he said, “and you can talk right
into my ear. tell me who you are and where you are going.”

so the gentle giant stretched himself out on the ground and silverboy
called into his ear:--

“we live in a cottage in our own forest, far as far away from here. our
father and our mother want a silver door, and we are going to find one
for them.”

“how do you know where to look?” asked the gentle giant, rather
drowsily, for he was getting sleepy.

“we asked the wizard squirrel, and he told us to go to the all-alone
axe. the all-alone axe told us to come here. we thought at first that
the wizard squirrel meant us to call out to the moon king, but he
didn’t.”

“eh!” shouted the gentle giant, starting up. “what’s that?”

“we thought he meant that we should call out to the moon king, but he
didn’t,” repeated silverboy.

“are you sure as sure that he didn’t say ‘the moon lady’?” demanded the
gentle giant eagerly.

“no, he didn’t,” silverboy answered, “but he said we must get the
all-alone axe to promise not to cut down the ancient oak.”

“did he promise?” the gentle giant asked.

“he said he would not touch the ancient oak if we could get you to
promise not to drag away his trees after he has cut them down.”

“but i have to,” declared the gentle giant earnestly. “you see, i must
build a big house to bring her to if she should ever marry me.”

“it seems to me that your house is pretty big now,” said silvergirl.

but the gentle giant shook his great head.

“no,” he said. “i wanted it as big as all outdoors, but it isn’t more
than half as big.”

“when is she coming?” asked silverboy.

“i don’t know,” replied the gentle giant sadly. “when i asked her to
marry me, she only laughed; but maybe she’ll change her mind some day,
and i should be so ashamed if i hadn’t a house big enough for her.”

and the gentle giant dropped a tear as big as a waterpail. it fell upon
silvergirl and wet her from head to foot, but the gentle giant was so
busy thinking that he did not notice the mischief he had done.

“i hope she’ll come,” declared silverboy warmly.

“so do i,” said silvergirl.

the gentle giant sat for a long while gazing on a mountain that could
just be seen through the trees. he seemed to be hard at work thinking.
at last he turned to silvergirl and asked:--

“so you really think this house is big enough, do you?”

“indeed i do,” declared silvergirl.

“i suppose you ought to know what a lady would like better than a great
clumsy fellow like me,” the gentle giant mused. then he said suddenly,
“i’ll tell you what i’ll do. if you will get the moon lady to say
she’ll marry me, i’ll not drag away any more trees from the all-alone
axe, and i’ll carry you both halfway up her mountain besides.”

“we’ll try our very best,” said the children.

then the gentle giant set silverboy on his right shoulder and
silvergirl on his left, and away they went to the moon lady’s mountain.
when you ride on the shoulder of a giant who can take a quarter of a
mile at a stride, even a long journey is soon done, and before they
had any idea that they were halfway up the mountain, the gentle giant
whispered as softly as he could:--

“here you are, little folk. just go up the mountain, and you’ll be at
her house in no time.”

“come with us,” the children pleaded, for it seemed very lonesome to be
left in the forest without the good-natured giant.

but he shook his head and whispered so gently that it was not much
louder than a waterfall:--

“i don’t dare. she might look right at me and laugh and ask what i had
come for, and then i should feel so ashamed. you go on, and if she only
says she will marry me, tie a burning torch to the pine tree at the top
of the mountain, and i’ll come and get you all and carry you wherever
you wish.” and before the children could say another word, they heard
his steps crashing down through the trees.

they went on and on toward the top of the mountain, and just as the sun
was setting, they began to see something shining through the trees.
it looked like glass and cream candy and rainbows, like brooks in the
sunshine and quiet pools in the moonlight. it flashed and glowed and
gleamed and sparkled. when they came nearer, they saw that it was a
splendid palace, and looking out of one of the windows was the most
beautiful lady that they had ever seen. she was laughing more musically
than they had ever heard any one laugh before. the sound was like that
made by little brooks rippling over stones, or little waves running up
on the shore. when she caught sight of the children, she called:--

“come in, you little dears. i’ll meet you at the door.”

she disappeared from the window, but they could hear her laughing
happily as she tripped though the halls. in a minute she stood in the
doorway, holding out her hands to them. she wore a silken gown almost
as yellow as the sunshine. her hair, too, was yellow and hung down to
the ground in long ripples that gleamed and shimmered as the sunbeams
touched them. on her head was a golden crescent, and above it was just
one golden star. the children stood gazing at her, for in all their
lives they had never seen any one half so lovely.

“well, what is it?” she called lightly. “am i so ugly? you stand there
gazing at me as if i were a monster.”

“i did not know anybody could be so beautiful,” cried silverboy
honestly. silvergirl slipped up beside her, and the moon lady took her
little brown hand in her own and began to laugh from pure pleasure and
merriment.

“come in,” she cried, “come in. i’ve been waiting for you. i knew you
were coming. it’s hard to keep secrets from the moon lady. secrets
are such nice things to laugh at, don’t you think so?” she called to
silverboy; and in a minute she had his hand, too, and was leading both
the children into the palace and up the broad marble stairs. “now,” she
said, “i have one room full of candy, and another full of toys, and
another full of brooks to sail boats in, and another full of ponies for
children to ride, and another full of pretty gardens to play in, and--”

“but how can there be gardens and brooks in a room in a house?” asked
silvergirl, gazing at her with great wondering eyes.

the moon lady looked amused. “because this is a wonder palace,” she
said at last. “don’t you know that in a wonder palace one can have
whatever she likes? you like gardens to play in, i am sure of that,
and so there are gardens in one of my rooms. you like ponies, and so
there are ponies here. i don’t see anything strange about it,” and she
laughed so merrily that the children could not help laughing with her.
they went to the candy room and the toy room and the brook room and the
pony room and the others. these were all so delightful that when the
moon lady asked which they liked best, they could not choose.

“that is no matter,” she declared, “for you must stay here with me
forever and always, and there will be new rooms for you every day, and
each one will be full of finer things than you ever saw before.”

“oh!” cried the children, “but we must not. we must go on and find a
silver door for the father and the mother.”

“what’s that about a silver door?” asked the moon lady. “a wizard told
me something about a silver door once, but i don’t know what he meant.
he said:--

  when the silver door flies open,
  then the iron door shuts tight.
  silver cheats you in the moonbeams,
  iron is honest in the light.”

“was the wizard a squirrel, dear moon lady?” the children asked.

“i forget,” she replied, “it was so long ago; but it was a good thing
to laugh at,” and again she laughed so lightly and musically that the
children fancied they heard a summer shower falling upon the leaves.
“have you seen a wizard, too?” she asked; “and has he told you about a
silver door? come into the room that is full of all the music of all
the world and tell me about it.”

so they went into the room, and while all the music of all the world
was playing softly around them, the children told the moon lady about
their little home in the far-away forest. they told her how much the
father and the mother wanted a silver door, and how they had come out
into the world to try to find one. they told her about the wizard
squirrel who would help them if the all-alone axe would agree to spare
the ancient oak; about the all-alone axe who would spare the ancient
oak if the gentle giant would stop dragging away his trees; and then
about the gentle giant who would stop dragging away the trees if only--

“what next?” the moon lady interrupted; “the gentle giant would stop
dragging away the trees if what?”

“if you would only marry him,” said silverboy boldly. “won’t you please
marry him, for we do want to find a silver door so very, very much?”

“what kind of giant is he?” the moon lady asked, trying to look very
serious.

“he’s the best giant in all the world, i just know he is,” declared
silverboy; and silvergirl added, “he was so good to us. i’m sure you
would love him. he said you told him you wouldn’t marry him, but you
will, won’t you?”

“certainly,” replied the moon lady, “i’d just as soon as not. i meant
to all the time, but i wanted to see whether he would come back and ask
me again.”

“then i’ll go to the very top of the mountain and tie a lighted torch
to the topmost bough of the tall pine tree, so he will know that you
are willing to marry him,” cried silverboy, and in a moment he would
have been away had not the moon lady stopped him.

“if the gentle giant wants me very much, he will come and get me,” she
said.

“but he’s afraid,” cried silvergirl; “he said he was.”

“then he can’t have me,” declared the moon lady.

“then we can’t get the silver door,” said silverboy soberly.

“why not?” asked the moon lady lightly. “wandering about the world to
find silver doors is not the thing for a girl, of course, but you can
do it if you like. silvergirl must stay here with me, but you may go
out and search. there’s nothing to hinder your going straight up to the
moon and choosing one for yourself. i’ve been there many a time. my
brother is the king of the moon.”

“but how can i get there?” cried silverboy. “can i go to the top of a
high, high mountain and leap upon the moon when it passes by?”

“if that isn’t just like a boy!” cried the moon lady, with another of
her merry laughs. “silvergirl wouldn’t try to get there in any such
foolish way, i know. would you, silvergirl?”

“i believe i should try to go to the top of the tallest tree in the
world,” replied silvergirl, “and then, when the moonbeams touched it, i
would beg them to carry me home with them.”

“that’s much more sensible,” said the moon lady gravely; and she added
with a little twinkle in her bright eyes, “if there wasn’t any other
way, yours would be the best, but there’s one way that is better.”

“what is it?” cried the children together.

“you must go to the slippery spider and ask him for web enough to build
a ladder,” she replied; “that is, you may go, silverboy; and when you
come back, we’ll talk about all-alone axes and wizard squirrels, and
maybe about gentle giants. there’s one thing you must remember; so long
as you are on the face of the earth you are safe, but if you go into
the earth you will never come here again. will you promise not to go
into the earth?”

silverboy promised. then he said good-bye and set out in search of the
slippery spider. he went down the mountain and over the fields, asking
every bird and every bee that he met if they knew where to find the
slippery spider, but not one of them could tell him. at length he asked
a little fly that was sitting on a green leaf in the sunshine.

“yes, i know,” said the fly, “but it makes me flutter to think of him.”

“how do you find his home?” asked silverboy.

“you have to go into the valley of twilight, past nine gray rocks and
three dead trees. by and by, you come to a great mass of briers, and
under the briers is where the slippery spider lives; but don’t go
there. he is--” but silverboy was already on his way to the valley of
twilight. he went past the nine gray rocks and the three dead trees and
came to the great mass of briers; but no slippery spider was to be seen.

“slippery spider, o slippery spider,” he called, “won’t you please give
me a little web to make a ladder to go to the moon?”

he heard a rustling in the leaves, and in a moment there stood beside
him the queerest, most dried-up little old man that he had ever seen.
the little old man made a bow and in a thin, squeaky voice he replied:--

“certainly, my good sir. i shall be glad to give you web enough to go
to the moon or seven times as far, if you wish. will you kindly walk
into my underground house. it is cool and comfortable there, and we
will talk this matter over together.”

silverboy was about to follow the slippery spider when he remembered
what the moon lady said, that he must not go into the earth, and he
asked:--

“couldn’t we sit down here and talk about it?” he fancied that the
slippery spider’s eyes flashed red for a moment, but the little old man
said quietly:--

“i see. some one has been telling you stories about my home. if you
prefer, we will sit down under these beautiful brier bushes. here is my
favorite lane, between the tumbling rock and the withering grass. will
you come?”

“i’m too big. i can’t get in there,” replied silverboy.

“oh, we can manage all that,” said the slippery spider, in an offhand
way. “just step in and there will be no trouble.”

silverboy thought he heard the buzzing of a fly, but he said to
himself, “surely, there’s no harm in just stepping toward the briers,”
and he said to the slippery spider:--

“certainly i will if you wish.”

he took one step into the narrow passageway; and he was surprised
enough to find that he could walk in it without the least difficulty.
“i wonder how he has done that,” he thought. “somehow he has made the
grass as tall as i am, and the brier bushes are as big as any tree in
the forest. i wonder what strange thing that is a way up above my head.
it looks like a mushroom, but it is as high as the roof of a house.”
suddenly it burst upon him that this really was a mushroom and that,
instead of making the passage big, the slippery spider had made him so
little that when the dreadful creature caught hold of him and dragged
him down into a cavern, he could not do anything to save himself.

the cavern was dark as dark, but after his eyes were a little used to
the darkness, he could see that a strong spider-web had been drawn
across the opening. he felt in his tiny pocket for his tiny knife and
began to cut away at the stout cords of the web; but he could not make
even the smallest break.

“that’s right,” called the thin, squeaky voice, “you are a good jailer;
i shan’t have to watch you.”

silverboy looked up, and there was the slippery spider peering through
the web, twice as tall as his prisoner. it did not seem quite so dark
as at first, and silverboy could see what an ugly grin was on his face.

“i suppose you don’t know,” said the slippery spider, with a hateful
chuckle, “that this is a magic web, and that every time you cut a
thread, you make it exactly seven times as strong as it was before.
oh, you’re a good jailer, you are!” and again he laughed, the most
sneering, malicious laugh that can be imagined. at last he went away,
leaving silverboy in the darkness. he came back once more for a moment
and called:--

“i say, you’re not fat enough yet. when you get fatter, i shall eat
you. you won’t have long to wait.”

poor silverboy, there he sat and wondered if there was any way to
escape. he thought of his father and mother and sister. “i shall never,
never see them again,” he sobbed; and he threw himself on the cold
floor of the cave and cried and cried.

suddenly he felt a little hand wiping away his tears with the softest
and daintiest of handkerchiefs. the hand was so smooth and gentle that
at first he pretended not to know that it was there for fear it would
go away. then a sweet little voice said softly:--

“boy, poor boy, don’t cry.”

“who are you?” asked silverboy. “how did you come here? did the
slippery spider bring you, too?”

“i was walking alone,” said the sweet voice, “and i saw the lane. it
looked pretty, for the briers were in bloom, and i started to come into
it; but before i knew it, i was in this dreadful den.”

“and did he make you small as he made me?” asked silverboy.

“oh, no, i am just as tall as ever.”

“let’s stand up back to back,” said silverboy, “and i will put my hand
on my head and then on yours, for i don’t see how any one could get
in here and not be made little.” so they stood up back to back, and
silverboy put his hand on his own head and then on hers, and he found,
as he had expected, that she was no taller than he. indeed, she was
not quite so tall.

“but what is this on your head?” he asked. “it feels pointed and queer.
what is it?”

“that’s my pearl coronet,” the little girl replied. “i wear it because
my father is a king. they call me the pearl princess. what is your
name?”

“i am silverboy. i wish it was light so i could see your face.”

“so do i,” said the pearl princess; “i mean, so i could see yours.
don’t you suppose we can ever, ever get out of this horrible place?”

“we’ll find a way somehow,” declared silverboy; for now that he was not
alone, he felt much more courageous and hopeful. he pulled and tugged
at the bars with all his might and main; but, try his best, he could
not stir them one bit. indeed, they only grew stronger and firmer
whenever he touched them; and even after a long, long time had passed
away, silverboy and the pearl princess were still prisoners in the den
of the slippery spider.

all this while silvergirl was living in the wonder palace with the
moon lady. as time passed, she was no more a child, but a tall young
girl who grew prettier every day until she had become the fairest
little maiden in all the land. she would have been the happiest if her
brother had only come back; but the brother did not come, and she began
to grow sad and pale. the moon lady sent her servants to scour the
country roundabout. they peered into the valleys, they looked through
and through every little corner of the forest; they asked all the brook
fairies and all the flower fairies and all the grass fairies, but none
of them had seen anything of silverboy. every night when they came
in from their search, silvergirl asked, “have you found my brother?”
when they answered, “no, but perhaps we shall find him to-morrow,” she
looked sadder than ever.

the moon lady was very much troubled.

“oh, i wish the moon king would come!” she often said. “he would know
what to do to help us.”

one night, just as it was growing dark, the moon lady and silvergirl
saw a bright light shining in the east. it grew larger and brighter
and came nearer every minute. the palace glowed and gleamed with the
reflection as if there were blazing torches in every corner of it.

“that’s my brother,” cried the moon lady joyfully. “he is the moon
king, and he will know how to help us find silverboy.”

by and by the moon king came driving straight up the side of the
mountain with his six shining white horses. the moon lady threw her
arms about his neck and kissed him. then she made a great feast for
him. on the table were the most delicious things of all the countries.
the air was full of all the music of all the world, and it was a very
happy time.

but after a little while the moon king did not even look at the
dainties or listen to the music. he looked at pretty silvergirl and he
listened to nothing but her voice.

“i saw your face in a dream last night,” he said, “and i want you for
my moon queen. will you marry me?”

“but my brother has not come back,” she answered, “and i haven’t yet
found the silver door for my father and mother.”

“i’ll give you silver doors for all the cottages in the forest,” cried
the moon king, “and i’ll find your brother if he is aboveground.”

“but the moon lady’s servants have looked everywhere aboveground,” said
silvergirl sadly, “and they could not find him.”

“then i’ll look underground,” declared the moon king. “i know all the
gnomes and dwarfs and pixies and underworld fairies and crickets and
field mice; and there isn’t one of them that wouldn’t be gladder than
glad to do me a favor. will you marry me when i have found silverboy?”

even the little bird at the window could not hear her answer; but it
seemed to please the moon king, for he cried joyfully to his sister,
“take good care of my bride, and i’ll be here with silverboy in the
twinkling of a star.” and before she could say good-bye, his white
horses with their golden harness were tearing down the mountain as if
they were trying to catch up with the swiftest river that ever flowed.

finding silverboy was not quite so easy as the moon king had expected,
for no one but the slippery spider knew that he had become so tiny. the
gnomes and the dwarfs and the pixies and the underworld fairies and
all the rest looked in vain for a tall boy in search of a silver door.
the crickets and the field mice looked, but silverboy was nowhere to
be found. silvergirl grew paler and paler, and the moon lady began to
feel anxious, not only lest some wild beast or some fierce bird of prey
should have devoured silverboy, but also lest silvergirl should grieve
herself to death for the loss of her brother.

all the little folk of the forest and field, those that wore feathers
or furs or hair or just plain skin, were talking about the lost
silverboy, and at last the news came to the thoughtful snail. no one
had dreamed of his joining in the search because he was so slow and had
to carry his house about with him; but the thoughtful snail went to his
neighbor, the friendly glowworm, and said:--

“i’ve been thinking.”

“well?” said the friendly glowworm.

“i’ve been thinking.”

“well?”

“i’ve been thinking,” declared the thoughtful snail for the third time,
and then he told what he thought. “the moon king has been good to me,”
he said slowly, “and i’ve been thinking that i should like to find the
brother of his bride.”

“is that all?” exclaimed the friendly glowworm. “we’d every one of us
like to find him.”

“but i’ve been thinking,” said the thoughtful snail again, and then he
stopped to think a little more. the friendly glowworm waited patiently,
and at last the thoughtful snail continued:--

“if they can’t find a tall young man aboveground, then there isn’t any
tall young man, and he must be short.”

“is that all?” exclaimed the friendly glowworm again.

“no,” replied the thoughtful snail slowly. “i’ve thought of something
else. all the real wizards are good friends of the moon king, and
there’s only one of the creatures of the forest that can change the
shape of a man.”

“you mean the slippery spider?” asked his friend.

“yes,” replied the thoughtful snail; “and i’ve been thinking that if
the slippery spider has changed his shape, he has made him smaller than
himself, of course, or else he would have got away long before this.”

“that’s so,” exclaimed the friendly glowworm, beginning to be
interested.

“i think he is smaller than a spider and that the slippery spider has
fastened him into some den. you know that he can spin a magic web. it
can be cut from the outside, but if any one tries to cut it from the
inside, it grows stronger.”

“then you think--”

“i’ve been thinking,” the thoughtful snail interrupted; “and i think
that if you will go with me to carry the torch, we will go to the
slippery spider’s hole to-night when he is away watching his nets, and
perhaps we shall find silverboy.”

that night the thoughtful snail and the friendly glowworm made their
way to the lane of the slippery spider. the friendly glowworm crept
under a dry leaf, and the thoughtful snail crouched in front of him so
that the keen eyes of the slippery spider should see no ray of light.
they watched him come out of his little lane and go away to look at his
nets to see if some unwary traveler had not been caught in them; then
they crept boldly in toward the den in the rock. the lane was so rough
that more than once the friendly glowworm was tumbled from one side
to the other, and so briery that the delicate horns of the thoughtful
snail were scratched and torn; but on they went until at last they were
in front of the slippery spider’s den. behold, there was the magic web
stretched across the opening, and thicker and stronger than was ever
the web of a spider before.

the friendly glowworm was so excited that he quivered like a jelly;
and as for the thoughtful snail, his shell fairly rattled against the
rock. it made such a noise that silverboy called:--

“who’s there?”

“who’s _there_?” cried the thoughtful snail gladly. “are you silverboy?”

“yes, who are you?”

for answer the thoughtful snail pushed his whole weight against the
web, while the friendly glowworm caught hold of it and pulled and
tugged with all his might. it fell on the ground, and silverboy stepped
out, pale as pale, and so small that his new friends could hardly see
him; but it was the real silverboy himself.

“come quick,” said they, “before the slippery spider comes home.”

[illustration: silverboy called, “who’s there?”]

“but i must go back for the pearl princess,” he declared. and although
the thoughtful snail grumbled that he had not come to get any sort of
princess, silverboy would not think of going without her. he took
her by the hand and led her out; and when the thoughtful snail and the
friendly glowworm saw how beautiful she was, they were glad, indeed,
that she had not been left in the den to be devoured by the slippery
spider.

down the little lane they all went, and at every step silverboy and the
pearl princess grew larger, until when they were near the opening, they
had to crouch and creep to get through it at all. silverboy was so glad
to find himself growing taller again that he did not care a straw for
that, and he only laughed when the briers tore his hands and his face
as he tried his best to keep their sharp points from the pearl princess.

at last they were out of the lane, and the thoughtful snail cried:--

“come, silverboy, come. don’t wait. the slippery spider may be here at
any moment”; for he had forgotten that silverboy was large enough now
to kill a hundred slippery spiders.

but silverboy stood gazing into the face of the pearl princess as if he
was bewitched.

“i never, never saw any one so beautiful,” he cried. “dear pearl
princess, i’m a man now. won’t you marry me?”

“yes,” replied the pearl princess, “i will; that is,” she added, “i
will, if you will promise never to tell any one that once i was smaller
than a spider.”

silverboy was now a tall young man. he led the pearl princess with one
hand and carried the thoughtful snail and the friendly glowworm in the
other, and they all went across fields and meadows and brooks, through
forests and forests, and up the highest of all mountains to the wonder
palace of the moon lady.

then there was rejoicing that _was_ rejoicing from the very bottom of
the palace to the top. the candy room threw its door open and begged to
be eaten. the toys set to playing all of their own accord. the brooks
ran faster than brooks ever ran before and made prettier little dimples
and ripples than any other brooks ever made. the ponies began to trot
and prance and canter. the gardens became more beautiful than any one
ever dreamed that even a garden could be. the moon king and silvergirl
were married, and silverboy and the pearl princess were married, and
the thoughtful snail and the friendly glowworm danced at the weddings.

the air was full of all the music that ever was in all the world; but
from another mountain a sound came across the valley, and up, up, to
the wonder palace, that was not music, but a most mournful sighing.
when the moon lady heard it, her face grew pink, and she turned away
and looked out of the window on the farther side of the palace.

“heigh, there!” cried the moon king. “who is that sighing on the night
of my wedding? find him and give him whatever he wants. do you know
him, sister? what does he want?”

“i think it must be that he wants me,” replied the moon lady demurely.

“that’s--that’s--why, that’s--” stammered the moon king, and stood
staring straight at his sister, too much surprised to say another word.

“it’s the gentle giant over on the other mountain,” silverboy
explained. “he said he would not drag away the trees of the all-alone
axe if the moon lady would marry him.”

“and so, my moon lady sister, you’re going to marry the gentle giant
to save the trees of the all-alone axe, are you?” exclaimed the moon
king in amazement.

“i think perhaps i will,” replied the moon lady, with one of her little
rippling laughs. “i don’t see any other way to keep him from sighing,
and you don’t like to hear sighing.”

“well, i never thought of such a thing!” declared the moon king.

and the moon lady retorted gayly, “i did, then. i’ve thought of it as
many times as three, and i’m going to do it. he’s the best giant in all
the world, and i’m going to marry him whenever he--”

just then there was a commotion outside, as if some one was crashing
through the forest in a great hurry. there was a tramping and a
stamping, and the face of the gentle giant appeared at the door, all
ashine with pleasure.

“i heard you, i heard you,” he cried. “i heard you down the mountain,
and i’ve come to get you. we’ll be married this very night, we will.”
and the gentle giant clapped his hands and danced and sang and laughed
out of pure happiness.

so there was another wedding in the palace, and then they all set off
to carry the moon lady to the home of the gentle giant. the thoughtful
snail and the friendly glowworm went, too, for silverboy carried one,
and the pearl princess carried the other. the friendly glowworm shone
so bright that no one noticed a strange thing that was happening.
something else had joined the wedding procession. it was the wonder
palace itself. after a little while it disappeared. it went up the
mountain a shorter way, and when they came to the great door of the
house of the gentle giant and looked in, behold, it was all aglow with
light; and no wonder, for there were sunbeams and rainbows and dewdrop
sparkles and waterfall gleams and fireplace sparks and northern light
glimmerings, all in one brilliant and glorious tangle. in the midst of
it and round about it was all the music of all the world, for the whole
wonder palace had slipped in through the farther door.

“the thoughtful snail and i have brought our houses with us,” said
the bride as quietly as if she always traveled with a palace for a
companion. “but, truly,” she whispered to the gentle giant, “i did not
know it was coming.”

“everything bright and beautiful is where you are,” he whispered back.

so it was that the gentle giant won his beautiful bride; that the trees
of the all-alone axe were never again dragged away; and that the wizard
squirrel was never driven from his home in the ancient oak.

but all this time the father and the mother were in their cottage far
away in the depths of the forest. at twilight the two often sat in the
doorway and talked about their children.

“they will come home some day,” declared the mother bravely.

“we shall never see them again,” said the father.

one night as they were saying this, they heard from far away a tramping
of many horses. up the forest road they came, their hoofs beating
softly on the mossy ground. when they were in full sight, the father
and the mother saw, first, a long line of knights in red armor, riding
on milk-white horses; then a line of knights in blue armor, riding on
horses black as the darkness itself. so they came. there were knights
in green and knights in yellow; and last of all, there were three
chariots abreast and an empty one behind them. the chariot on the left
was made of steel that flashed in the light of the torches. in it sat
a handsome young man. beside him was his princess, and she was all
aglow with softly gleaming pearls. on the right was an immense chariot
of silver, and in this was a giant with so gentle a face that no one
could ever be afraid of him, even though he was so large. he, too, had
a bride sitting beside him. she had strings and strings of opals about
her throat. over them and over her face played a soft clear light that
was almost like the moonbeams on the water. between these two chariots
was a third. it was all ablaze with diamonds, and in it sat one that
every one who looked upon him would have known to be a king. the
shadows were growing deeper, but a brilliant light that did not come
from the torches was all about him and his beautiful bride. whenever
they spoke or looked at each other, the light flashed joyfully and made
all around them as bright as day.

the father and the mother sat in the door, saying never a word, but
looking and looking and looking. the wonderful procession swept past
their humble little cottage, until the three chariots were in front of
the door. then they stopped. the father and the mother rose quickly and
bowed themselves before the king.

“it is ordered that you shall no longer dwell in this cottage,” he said
gravely.

at first the father and the mother were too grieved and alarmed to
speak, but finally the mother plucked up courage to plead:--

“o king, if you will only let us stay here till the children come home!
we will do never a bit of harm. we won’t even pick up the dead sticks
for firewood, or the dry grass to make our bed. if we go away, the
children will not know where to find us, and we shall never see them
again. please, please let us stay till we have seen them just once
more.”

the king shook his head sternly and said:--

“you are to live here no longer.”

then the father hid his face in his hands and the mother threw her
apron over her head; but in a moment the young man had sprung down
from the chariot of steel and was crying, “father, father, don’t you
know your own boy?” and the beautiful young woman who had been in the
chariot that was all a-glitter with diamonds had pulled the apron away
from the face of the mother and was crying, “mother, mother, have you
forgotten your own daughter?”

the moon king sent away the knights, and then he and silvergirl, the
pearl princess and silverboy, and the moon lady and the gentle giant
sat down together on the soft grass just outside the cottage. such
stories as they had to tell of the search for the silver door! they
told about the wizard squirrel, the all-alone axe, the wonder palace,
the slippery spider, and no one can say how many other folk. they
talked and talked and talked; and while they were talking, they heard a
funny little chattering over their heads. they all looked up, and there
on the bough of a pine tree sat the wizard squirrel and the all-alone
axe, hobnobbing in the most sociable way, while the friendly glowworm
and the thoughtful snail, who had come, of course, with the rest of the
company and were now sitting on the moss at the foot of the tree, were
staring at them with all their eyes, for they had never before seen an
axe and a squirrel dancing together on a branch.

for three days and three nights the happy people talked of the
wonderful things that had happened. then silvergirl said:--

“but, father and mother, you haven’t asked for the silver door.”

“little we care for silver doors,” they cried, “now that we have our
children back again.”

“but we have one for you. it is in the country of the moon king; and
when you go through the silver door, you come into a golden palace.
will you come with us and stay all your lives long?”

“yes, we will come,” said the father and the mother, and they stepped
joyfully into the golden chariot that had been empty before.

then the knights came back and lifted their plumed hats and bowed
before the father and the mother. they all rode away and away and away
from the gloomy forest to the happy country of the moon king; and when
a messenger last came from that country, they were all living together
in the greatest peace and happiness in the beautiful golden palace with
the silver door.




king hansel the first




king hansel the first


there was once a boy named hansel who had lost his father, mother, and
sister. some people thought that they had been stolen by trolls, but
no one knew certainly. everybody’s house was full, and there was no
room for the lonely little boy. “there is nothing for you to do but to
go out into the world and seek your fortune,” people said to him; so
hansel put on his little cap and started out.

he walked along the highway until he came to a place where four roads
met. the first went through a forest; the second went down a steep
hill; the third led over a sunny plain; and the fourth wound up a
bleak, rocky mountainside. “when one has nowhere to go, one road is
as good as another,” said hansel to himself, and he looked at each
in turn. the sun was warm and the forest looked cool and shady, so he
decided to go through the forest.

the road was soft and mossy. there were many flowers along the way.
every little while there were open glades that were red with sweet wild
strawberries. he often stopped to pick them, and as he went along, he
said to himself, “it isn’t so bad a thing, after all, to have to seek
one’s fortune--if i only had a father and mother to go back to after i
have found it. such a pleasant road as this must lead to some beautiful
place. maybe i shall come to a palace. it will be made of gold, of
course, and the windows will sparkle like diamonds. i will go around to
the smallest back door and ask, ‘do you want a boy to herd the sheep or
the cattle?’ the king’s man will answer, ‘yes, we do. come in and we
will pay you a silver penny every month.’ i can grow up fast, and some
day, when the king’s daughter is crossing the river, she will fall in
and i--”

these thoughts were broken in upon by a pitiful noise of a sort that
the boy had never heard before. it sounded a little like the crowing
of a cock, but it was hoarse and half-stifled. “some creature is in
trouble,” said hans to himself. “i’ll hurry on and see what it is.” he
ran down the road, and every minute the crying sounded louder and more
distressed. at last he came to a tiny clearing where a little hut was
standing. the door was closed and the owner had evidently gone from
home. not far from the house was a coop, and in the coop was one lone
cock.

“please give me some water,” he begged; “i am dying of thirst.”

“where shall i find it?” hansel asked.

“indeed, i don’t know,” the cock gasped. “the brook said it was tired
of having creatures drink it. ‘i don’t drink them,’ it said, ‘and why
should i let them drink me?’ and then it ran off downhill as fast as it
could go. but do find me some water. i am choking.”

hansel began to search for water, but not a pool or a pond or a river
or a brook or a spring or a swamp could be found. there was not even a
drop of dew to carry to the suffering cock, for the sun was warm and
even the dew had vanished. then hansel went back and said:--

“i have searched the country through, and not a drop of water can i
find.”

“then i shall die,” the cock groaned.

“no, you won’t,” said the boy cheerily, “for i’m going to dig a well
for you.”

hansel looked all around the little place and at last he found a spade.
then he pulled off his jacket and began to dig. the sun grew hotter
and hotter, but still he kept at it.

“have you found water yet?” cried the cock, after a little while.

“not yet,” answered hansel, “but the farther i dig, the nearer i am to
it,” and he dug faster than ever.

“have you found it yet?” asked the cock again, a little later.

“the earth is moist,” hansel answered; but he was now so deep down in
the hole that his voice could hardly be heard.

“have you found it yet?” the cock gasped faintly, after a few minutes.
“i can’t stand up any longer. i think i am dying.”

hansel was now so deep down that he could not hear the cock’s question;
but he gave it a good answer, nevertheless, for he climbed out of the
well as fast as ever he could. the water was coming in by pailfuls,
and he carried his cap all full and dripping to the thirsty cock.

it was not long before the cock was as well as ever. hansel made a
little trench from the well to the coop so that the poor thing should
not suffer from thirst again. then he said:--

“good-bye, friend cock. i must go on my way now, for i am seeking my
fortune.”

“but i haven’t thanked you yet,” said the cock. “how shall i pay you
for what you have done for me?”

“oh, i don’t want any pay,” called hansel over his shoulder, for he was
already on his way.

“but i have a gift for you,” cried the cock, and hansel went back. the
cock stretched his neck through the bars of the coop. something was in
his bill.

“this is for you,” he said, and he dropped a little black seed into
the boy’s hand. “when you are in trouble, plant that seed.”

“thank you very much,” said hansel. “i’ll keep it to remember you by,”
and he dropped it into his pocket. “good-bye again,” he called.

“oh, but wait a minute,” pleaded the cock. “i have some advice for you.”

“all right,” replied the boy good-naturedly. “what is it? advice isn’t
heavy, and i can carry it in the same pocket with the seed.”

“the first time that a giant asks you a question, be sure to answer
‘yes.’”

“i hope i’ll not meet any giants, but if i do, i’ll not forget,” hansel
promised. “all good things are three, so good-bye again.”

“then gifts should be three,” declared the cock, “and the third is yet
to come. this is a bit of advice, too. there’s no good fortune down
this road. whoever walks beyond this house comes to trouble. turn back
and choose another way.”

hansel hesitated, for he remembered how hot and sandy or rocky the
other roads looked; but he remembered, too, what his old nurse used
to say, “there’s many and many a thing that the beasts and birds know
which men and women have yet to learn.”

“i’ll go back,” he said; “and now good-bye for the last time.”

“good-bye,” called the cock, with a cheery crow. “don’t lose the seed
and don’t forget to say ‘yes’ to the first question that a giant asks
you.”

then hansel went back through the forest, and it was not long before
he came to the place where the four roads met. “one is as good as
another,” he said to himself again, “and i may as well take the
second.”

at first it was not an easy road, for it went down a steep hill covered
with round stones. the boy had to pick his way among them as gingerly
as if they had been eggs. but when he was once at the foot of the hill,
it became a very pleasant road, for it went along beside the shore of
a pretty lake. the tiny waves rippled up against the yellow sand as
if they thought the little lake was a real ocean and themselves real
breakers. pearly shells lay on the shore. hansel picked up a handful
and walked along tossing them up in the air and catching them. then he
began to talk to himself. he said:--

“nurse used to tell me about the king of the water world. he lives in
a cave far down in the ocean. he wears a crown of pearls and he sits
on a throne. the sun never shines there, but the walls of the cave
are covered with rubies and emeralds, and they sparkle so that it is
as light as day. when i come near his palace, i will ask if he has any
work that a boy can do. he will say, ‘yes, one of my mermaids has been
stolen away from me, and i will give you half of my kingdom if you will
bring her back.’ then i will go far and far and farther than far. i
will go through groves of coral, over beds of green and blue and yellow
sea-mosses. i shall see shells of crimson and silver and gold; but i
won’t stop for one of them. i’ll go on and on and on till i come to the
den of the sea-monster that stole the mermaid. there’ll be a little
hole in her dungeon, and she will stretch out her white hand and beckon
me. i’ll kill the dragon and--”

“meow, meow!” came to his ears; “help me, help me!”

“i know what that is, anyhow,” said the boy to himself; and he called,
“pussy, pussy, what’s the matter? i’m coming to help you. but where are
you?” he cried, for no cat was in sight.

“meow, meow!” wailed the cat, and hansel began to search for her. far
out in the lake was a tiny green island, and the cries seemed to come
from that, though nothing was to be seen on it but a sandy beach, a
rock, and a tall tree. hansel waded out into the lake, but the water
grew deep so fast that he had to go back to the shore. still the
pitiful cries continued. the boy threw off his clothes and swam out to
the island. behind the rock lay a heavy bag, tied with seven knots; and
it was from the bag that the cries were coming.

“hold on, pussy, i’ll get you out,” he said, and he set to work to
untie the seven knots. each one was more difficult than the ones
before it, but at last the seventh had been untied, and a poor,
forlorn, yellow-and-black cat crept out. hansel stroked her wet fur and
rubbed it dry with some bits of dead grass. the cat purred and arched
her back and rubbed her head against his hand.

“how did you happen to be in that bag?” he asked.

“some one gave my master a pretty gray cat,” she replied. “he said he
did not want two, and so he tied me up in the bag and threw me into the
lake.”

“i’m glad i came along in time to get you out,” said hansel heartily.
“if you will sit on my shoulder, i will swim ashore and carry you.”

the cat sprang eagerly to his shoulder, and he started to swim ashore.
at first she was as light as a feather, but before they had gone
far from the island, she began to grow heavy. she grew heavier and
heavier, but the boy would not throw her off to drown. he struggled on
and came at last to the shore, but he was so tired that he could hardly
stand. as he lay on the shore resting, the cat scrambled about among
the bushes, and seemed to be searching for something.

after a little, the boy cried:--

“good-bye, pussy, good-bye. when a boy is seeking his fortune, he must
seek it,” and he started to go on farther.

“but i haven’t thanked you yet,” cried the cat, running out of the
bushes. “what shall i give you for what you have done for me?”

“oh, i don’t want any reward,” cried hansel. “i’m glad i got you out.”

“but i have a gift for you,” called the cat, and hansel went back. the
cat dropped a tiny white seed into his hand. “when you are in trouble,
plant that,” she said.

“thank you, thank you,” said hansel. “i’ll keep it to remember you by,”
and he put it into his pocket to lie beside the little black seed.
“good-bye again,” he cried.

“ah, but wait a minute,” pleaded the cat. “i have some advice for you.”

“i am getting so much advice,” thought hansel, “that i am afraid i
shall be a wise man before i have made my fortune”; but he said aloud,
“all right, what is it? i can carry it in another pocket.”

“the second time that a giant asks you a question, be sure to answer,
‘with salt.’”

“with salt, with salt,” repeated the boy. “to the first question i am
to answer ‘yes,’ and to the second i must say, ‘with salt.’ i certainly
hope i shan’t meet any giants, but if there’s nothing harder to do than
to answer a few questions, i can surely do that. good-bye again, i’m
going on till i find my fortune.”

“but there’s no good fortune down this road,” said the cat. “whoever
passes this lake comes to trouble. turn back and choose another road.”

the thought of that long, long hill with the rolling stones was not
very pleasant, and hansel hesitated; but the cat looked at him so
earnestly that at last he answered:--

“all right, pussy, i’ll go back and i won’t lose the little white seed.”

“and don’t forget to say ‘with salt’ to the second question,” cried the
cat.

“no, i won’t. good-bye, pussy, good-bye.”

climbing the long hill was not nearly so hard as he had expected, for
he had rolled so many of the round stones from the path as he went
down. then, too, the sun was no longer directly overhead. indeed, the
air grew cooler and cooler, and when he came to where the four roads
met, it was so cold that he had to blow on his fingers to keep them
from being stiff and numb.

“i suppose a boy can seek his fortune whether it is hot or cold,”
thought hansel, and he set off bravely to walk in the third road.
this seemed to lead directly across a vast plain; but he could not
see very far, for there were thick clouds of dust blowing in little
whirlwinds. “all this dust must come from some great city,” thought the
boy. “perhaps i shall come to it before long. i will go straight to
the lord mayor, and say, ‘sir lord mayor, is there anything for a boy
to do to make his fortune?’ he will answer, ‘yes, one of my ships is
all ready to sail. you may sail with her, and if you have anything to
venture, perhaps you will make your fortune in one voyage. what have
you to send?’ then i’ll say, ‘sir lord mayor, i have a black seed and
a white one.’ no, i forget, if he happens to be a giant, i must say
‘yes’ to the first question. that will be such nonsense that he will
think i am a philosopher, and he will say, ‘i need another counselor,
and i’ll take you. you shall have a long red gown and a white wig, and
every morning before breakfast you shall have a great piece of red, red
gold.’ i will say ‘thank you, i--’”

without thinking what he was about, hansel had been talking aloud; and
now the words were fairly blown from his lips, for a great storm had
suddenly arisen. big hailstones beat upon him. he was thrown into the
brambles and against the stones. his cap was lost, his clothes were
torn, and he was almost exhausted when at last he managed to get into
the shelter of a high rock that kept the biting wind from him.

it seemed to him that he had hardly taken three long breaths before he
heard a loud buzzing. “come and help us,” it said; “come and help us.”

“i knew cocks could talk,” thought hansel in surprise, “and cats can,
of course, but i never heard bees talk before. they must be in some
great trouble. i can’t do anything to help them, that’s sure, for it is
all i can do to get my breath.”

“come and help us,” buzzed the bees, until hansel could not bear to
hear their pleading any longer and he asked:--

“what is the matter?”

“our hive is blown over,” they replied. “the storm came up so suddenly
that many bees are away, and when they come back, they will not know
where to go if the hive is not in its place. do put it back for us.”

“surely, i can do so much for them if i am tired,” thought hansel; and
he asked, “where does your hive belong?”

“on top of this high rock,” they replied.

“i shouldn’t think it would stay there in this wind,” said hansel to
himself, “but i suppose they know best. people say that bees are wise,
and maybe they know some way of making it firm.”--“i don’t know whether
i can climb the rock in this storm,” he said aloud, “but at least i can
try.”

so hansel took up the beehive carefully and began to climb. it seemed
at every step as if the wind would surely blow him away; but he kept on
and on, and at last he was at the top of the rock and had put the hive
into the place that the bees pointed out. the storm grew worse and
worse until it almost seemed as if the rock itself would be blown over.

“i don’t see how your hive is going to stay there,” said hansel. “the
moment i let go, it will fall down and be blown to nobody knows where.”

“please stay and hold it for us,” the bees pleaded anxiously.

“it’s all i can do to hold my head on my shoulders,” replied hansel.

but the bees still begged, “do stay and help us, do help us.”

“all right, i’ll try it,” said hansel, “but it looks as if the hive and
the rock and myself would all blow away together.”

the wind blew as if it feared it would never have another chance and
meant to make the best of this one. the rain fell, not in drops, it
seemed to hansel, or in pailfuls, but in whole pondfuls, in oceanfuls.
he threw one arm around the hive and the other around a jagged point
of rock, and there he clung for dear life. it was a hard pull for the
tired boy, but after a while the storm cleared as suddenly as it had
arisen. many of the wandering bees returned and made their way into the
hive and were safe. the other bees buzzed a welcome to them, and hansel
could not help being glad that he had saved their home. they clustered
around hansel and buzzed their thanks into his ear. they gave him all
the honey he could eat and a fine large piece of comb to carry away
with him.

“but where are you going?” they asked.

“everywhere and nowhere,” answered hansel. “i haven’t any father or any
mother or any place to stay in, and i am going out into the world to
seek my fortune.”

“there’s no good fortune to be found on this road,” declared the bees.
“you must go back to where the four roads meet and choose another.”

“there are roads enough in the world,” said hansel with a laugh, “but
somehow none of them seem to be the right ones.”

“every one has his own road,” said the bees. “some find it in one day,
some in two days, and some in three days, but there is surely a road.”

“all right, i’ll go back and try the road uphill,” hansel said. “bees
are wise, i know. can you tell me whether i shall find my fortune on
that road? the mountain is so steep that i am sure i should break my
neck if i had to come down it by night; and then, too, there are no
more roads to try.”

“we must not say any more,” buzzed the bees, “but we can make you a
gift that will be of help in time of need”; and they brought out from
the farthest corner of the hive a tiny seed as yellow as their own
honey. “take good care of this,” they said, “for the time will come
when you will have need of it. and there is one thing more; we have
some advice for you.”

“i’ve had two pieces already,” rejoined hansel, laughing, “and yet i
don’t seem to be wise enough to find the right road.”

“at least, we can tell you something that will keep you from going
where you do not wish to go,” buzzed the bees.

“thank you kindly,” said hansel. “i will put it into my jacket pocket
with the other pieces. when one has not much else to carry, he can
surely carry a piece of advice. what is it, then?”

“to the third question that a giant asks you, be sure to answer, ‘in
the land and in the sea,’” replied the bees earnestly. “do not forget.”

“no, i’ll remember,” hansel promised. “to the first question i am to
say ‘yes’; to the second, ‘with salt’; and to the third, ‘in the land
and in the sea.’ i hope no one will ask me a fourth question, for i’d
have to answer that all out of my own wit. now good-bye. thank you
kindly for the honey and the seed and the bit of advice. i’ll turn back
and go up the mountain if i can see to find the road.” he waved his
hand in farewell, turned back, and crossed the plain once more.

before long he was at the place where the four roads met. he could
not exactly “choose” which one to take, for there was only one left
that he had not tried; but he gazed for at least three minutes at the
long, winding way that disappeared in the shadows. he fancied that
there was a heavy stone castle at the top of the mountain, but it was
fast growing dusky and he could not be sure whether what he saw was
not a gray cloud. it was a lonely road to follow in the twilight, and
hansel could not help thinking of the other boys who were safe in their
own homes; but he was a stout-hearted little fellow, and he said to
himself, “i suppose that if a boy is seeking his fortune, he must seek
it; and since the end of the road won’t come to me, why, then, i’ll go
to the end of the road.” and he set off bravely to climb the mountain.

the road wound about and went in many zigzags, but at last hansel was
at the top of the mountain. sure enough, there was a great stone castle
that towered up till the battlements really seemed to reach the clouds.
hansel walked timidly up to the gate and knocked. no one answered. he
knocked again, for it was so dark and wild on the hill that he began
to feel afraid. “if they will only let me come in,” he thought, “and
give me a bit of straw to lie on, i don’t care for any grand fortune”;
and he knocked a third time.

then the gate was opened a little way, and a great coarse hand as large
as hansel’s whole body was stretched out and pulled him in through the
opening. of course, the hand belonged to a giant, who was almost as
tall as the walls of the castle. the boy ventured to put his head back
and take one look at the giant’s face. it would have been frightful
enough in any case, for it looked so hateful; but it was especially
startling because it had three eyes, one above each ear and one on
the top of the head. the giant could see best with that, and now he
bent his head over and glared at hansel with it. this eye was red and
fiery, and at its flashing the boy felt as though the lightning was
about to strike him. the giant gazed a minute or two and then called:--

[illustration: a great coarse hand pulled him in]

“brothers humpkin and lumpkin, here’s a boy.”

“let’s eat him, brother mumpkin,” cried two harsh voices, and
immediately two more dreadful giants came shambling out of the castle
keep. one had three ears, and the other had three mouths. this third
giant was lumpkin, and he was the most horrible of the three, for he
was continually grating his teeth and mumbling his heavy lips.

“we’ll eat him, well eat him,” they cried; but when they caught sight
of the boy and saw how small and thin he was, they laughed scornfully.

“he’ll be only a mouthful apiece for us,” said humpkin. lumpkin,
however, began to feel the boy’s ribs and thighs, pinching him now and
then to see if the flesh was firm and solid.

“maybe he’ll not be so bad,” said lumpkin. “well put him into one of
the dungeons, and in a day or two we’ll have a feast. these little
creatures are small, but they are tender.”

now one giant would have been enough to frighten anybody, but with
three such monsters before him it is no wonder that hansel was white
with terror. mumpkin held him up by the back of the neck as if he was a
kitten and demanded:--

“do they eat boys in the land of the pogglywogs?”

if hansel had answered, “i don’t know,” the giant would probably have
retorted, “you’ll find out that we do here,” and perhaps have taken a
bite on the instant, but hansel in all his terror had not forgotten
his promise to the cock, and he faltered, “yes.”

“listen to that!” cried humpkin. “now we’ll know how the pogglywogs do
it, for we must do like them if we want to grow any taller.”

then mumpkin gave the boy a pinch to make sure that he was attending
and asked in a voice that sounded like distant thunder:--

“how do they eat them?”

“with salt,” answered the boy faintly.

“he says, ‘with salt,’” repeated mumpkin. “what’s salt? i never saw
any. you boy, where do they find salt?”

“in the sea and in the land,” answered the boy.

“‘in the sea and in the land,’” repeated mumpkin. “there’s one thing
sure, we must have some salt, whatever it may be. humpkin, if you will
take the boy to the dungeon, i’ll go out and look the land through for
some salt.”

so poor hansel was taken to the dungeon and left there. giants are
usually dull, and although these monsters wanted him to grow fat, it
never entered their stupid heads that they must give him anything to
eat. they shut the door, locked and bolted it, and went away, thinking
what a dainty morsel would be ready for them when mumpkin came back
with the salt.

“it won’t take him long to find it,” said humpkin. “that third eye of
his can see all there is to see.”

“i wonder where he will go,” said lumpkin.

“oh, not farther than the foot of the hill,” declared humpkin. “there
isn’t much land beyond.”

while they were talking, mumpkin was plunging down the hill. he kicked
the great stones from his path as if they were only so many pebbles,
and he tore up the bushes and little trees along his way. it was night,
of course, but that made no difference, for, as any three-eyed person
knows, one who has three eyes can see as well in the night as in the
daytime. when he came to the foot of the hill, he looked around at the
different roads. he did not know anything about salt and thought it
was as likely to grow on trees as anywhere else, so he started to go
through the forest. with two eyes he looked at the trees on either side
of the way and with the third, the one on the top of his head, he kept
close watch of the moon. “i heard once that the moon was made of green
cheese,” he said to himself, “and maybe salt is a kind of cheese.”

now mumpkin was not at all used to thinking, and he was so tired by
this effort that he had to sit down to rest. he fell asleep and slept
a long while. he was awakened by a loud “cock-a-doodle-doo!” directly
in front of him. the giant rubbed his three eyes and looked around. a
big handsome cock was strutting up and down in the path, looking at the
monster as if he were a new kind of worm that might or might not be
good to eat.

“get out of the road!” roared the giant.

“with pleasure,” replied the cock. it gave a little flutter with its
wings and in a moment it was resting comfortably on the giant’s left
shoulder.

“yah! get off!” the giant growled.

“certainly,” the cock replied, “but if you knew how much i know, you
would be glad to have me whisper in your ear.”

“i’ll wring your neck,” roared the giant, and put up his hand to catch
the cock; but in a twinkling the bird was on the limb of a tree higher
than even a giant could well reach.

“are you going farther down this road?” the cock asked.

“yes, i am,” said the giant. “i am going to find salt; but it’s no
business of yours.”

“may i give you a bit of advice?” asked the cock politely.

“keep your advice to yourself,” the giant growled.

“but i have to give it,” said the cock. “that is what i am put here
for. it is this: do not go down this road any farther. there is no salt
here, and if you go, something will surely happen to you.”

“something might happen to you, you stupid little bunch of bill and
feathers,” shouted the giant angrily, “but things don’t happen to folk
as big as i am, i’ll have you know.” and he started off down the road
faster than he had ever walked before in all his life.

for a long while nothing happened except that the trees grew taller and
taller; but suddenly the giant heard a growling which sounded louder
than any growling that he had ever heard before, and in a moment a
dreadful creature came out of the woods. it was a thousand times as big
as the giant. its enormous tail switched from side to side. it walked
on four legs, and when it stretched one of them out, the giant saw
that it was armed with sharp claws almost as long as his whole body.
the creature was covered with a thick growth of yellow-and-black hair
which stood on end at the sight of the strange object in the road. it
glared at him with horrible great yellow eyes, and then put out one big
paw to touch him and rolled him over and over in the dust. never was a
giant so terribly frightened before. the monster tumbled him about and
played with him awhile, then gave a great yawn which revealed a vast
cavern of a mouth as red as a fiery furnace, and walked away.

the giant lay trembling, but after a time he shook himself and turned
toward home. “salt or no salt, i’ll go no farther,” he declared. “i’ll
go home, and i’ll run faster than any giant ever ran before.”

he ran as fast as he could, but somehow he did not get over the ground
at all rapidly. it seemed a long way from one tree to another. he was
tired and he was thirsty. he stopped at a clear, quiet little pool to
get a drink. a beetle sat in the bottom of the pool, looking straight
at him. “i never saw a beetle like that in the water before,” growled
the giant, and he made an ugly face at it. the beetle did the same, but
made no reply. the giant drank what he wanted and went on. it was a
long, long way. the sun rose and the sun set many and many a time, but
at last the giant was at the gate of the castle.

“let me in,” he cried. “i tell you, let me in.” he pounded on the gate
with all his might, and at last he heard his brothers coming. “i’ll
kill them,” he growled, “for keeping me out here,” and he thumped
louder than ever. at last lumpkin opened the gate.

“it is strange, isn’t it,” he said, “that mumpkin does not come. i
suppose he’s found something good to eat, another boy, maybe, and he
means to keep it all for himself. i don’t care whether he comes or
not, but i want that salt. ugh! what a horrid beetle that is,” and he
crushed it with his foot. this was the end of mumpkin. the forest was
no ordinary forest, of course, but an enchanted wilderness; and whoever
went too far in it turned into some wild creature. the giant had not
found it out, but he had really been a beetle for a long, long time,
and the monster that had given him such a fright was only a playful cat.

the brothers shut the gate and went into the castle again. they were
tired of waiting for a mouthful of roasted boy, but they were always
afraid that the other race of giants, the pogglywogs, would become
larger than they; and now that they had heard that the pogglywogs ate
salt with their boys, they did not want to taste this one without it.

“i won’t wait any longer,” declared lumpkin. “i’m going to find some
salt, and what’s more, i won’t be so long about it as that stupid
lubber.” so the second giant set out to search for salt. when he
came to the foot of the mountain, he looked at the three roads and
concluded to go on the one that went still farther down. the rolling
stones gave him considerable trouble, and more than once he had rather
a hard fall because of them. he was half-stunned by the last tumble,
and he lay on the ground a minute or two before he tried to get up.
when he rose again and looked around him, there stood a cock quietly
watching him.

“may i ask,” said the cock politely, “if you intend to go much farther
on this road?”

“what’s that to you?” growled lumpkin, rubbing his bruised elbow and
grating his teeth horribly. “i’ll eat you, i will. i always eat cocks.”

“may i give you a bit of advice?” asked the cock.

“no,” the giant thundered. “i can make advice for myself. get out.”

“but i have to give it,” said the cock quietly. “that is what i am put
here for. this is it: do not go down this road any farther. there is no
salt here, and if you go, something will surely happen to you.”

“something will happen to _you_!” shouted the giant, and with all three
mouths at once he tried to bite the cock’s head off. the cock flew up
on the limb of a great tree, far above the head of the giant, and sat
there watching as the giant strode off down the hill.

it was not long before he came to a lake. now the giant had never seen
water in that form before. this looked smooth and easy to walk on, so
he set out to walk on it instead of on the road. even near the shore
the water was deep, and in a little less than no time the giant was
down on his knees in the lake, spluttering and storming and snarling
and growling and grating his teeth together as if he meant to eat even
the rocks and the sand.

“there are better ways of getting over the water than trying to walk on
it,” said a voice pleasantly.

the giant staggered to his feet and looked around.

“eh?” said he.

“there are better ways of getting over the water than trying to walk
on it,” the voice repeated; and now the giant saw that it proceeded
from a boat that was coming nearer and nearer. in the boat was a
yellow-and-black cat, who bowed politely and sat waiting for him to
speak.

“what’s that thing you’re in?” demanded the giant.

“this is a boat,” the cat replied. “with it one can easily go on the
water.”

“get out, i want it,” the giant growled.

the cat’s yellow eyes began to look fiery, but she asked very quietly:--

“are you sure that you can manage it?”

“of course i can; i am a hundred times as big as you.”

“but i have a collar around my neck, and you have none.”

“i’ll have one, too,” the giant cried. “where’s the stuff you make it
of?”

“there’s some stuff you might use on the ground on the farther side of
that big rock,” said the cat. “see that you make it thick enough.”

the giant picked up a great mass of the stuff. it was lead and it was
exceedingly heavy, but he bent it and squeezed it and pulled it and
punched it and jammed it and pounded it until he had made a collar big
enough to go over his head with only the least bit of crowding. it
would have taken at least ten common men to lift it, but the giant put
it on without any trouble.

“bring that boat to me,” he called in a voice that would have
frightened most cats out of a year’s growth; but this one only looked
at him and slowly rowed the boat up to the shore. then she sprang out
lightly and curled herself up on a warm rock. the giant stepped on the
gunwale of the boat with one of his enormous feet. then he lifted the
other foot, and, of course, the boat tipped over just as any other boat
would have done, and in a moment the giant lay on the bottom of the
lake. his head with the leaden collar was down and his heels were up;
and up they stayed, for this was the end of the three-mouthed giant
lumpkin.

“folk that never use their heads ought not to mind losing them,” said
the cat, as she yawned comfortably and stretched herself out to take a
nap.

meanwhile, several events had taken place in the castle of the three
giants. humpkin had more than once gone to the top of the tower and
listened first with one ear, then with another, and then with all
three; but not a sound could he hear of either mumpkin or lumpkin. “i
rather think they are killed,” he said, “and i’m glad of it, for now
i’ll eat that boy all by myself. i don’t care anything about salt,
whatever it may be, and i’ll go straight to the dungeon and get him.”

now several events had been happening in the dungeon also. at first it
was a very white-faced and badly frightened boy who lay there on the
damp floor; but as hour after hour passed and no one came to harm him,
he began to recover from his fright a little and to look about him
to see if there was any way of making his escape. the walls were of
stone, the window was far above his head, and the door was evidently
locked and bolted. what could he do?

while he sat pondering, he thought he heard a sound on the other side
of the wall as if some one was speaking. he could see a tiny crack in
the wall, so he lay down on the floor and put his ear to the crack.
then he heard a voice that asked:--

“who are you?”

“i’m a boy, and my name is hansel. i came out to seek my fortune. the
cock and the cat and the bees wouldn’t let me go on the other roads,
and so i came here, and the giants caught me. they say they mean to eat
me. who are you?”

“i am a magician,” the voice replied.

“then why don’t you tear the castle down or kill the giants or call
up an earthquake or do something?” the boy cried. “i always thought
magicians could do anything they chose.”

“so they can if they choose something that they can do,” declared the
voice. “but even magicians,” he added, “cannot do everything without
anything.”

“can’t you draw a magic circle so the giants can’t touch you?” asked
hansel.

“i could if i had anything to draw it with,” said the magician, “but i
haven’t.”

“i haven’t even a crumb of anything to eat,” said hansel, “and i am
hungry as hungry.”

“haven’t you a bit of bread or a kernel of corn or a grain of wheat
about you?”

“not one. i have only three little seeds of nobody knows what; a black
one that a cock gave me; a yellow one that some bees gave me; and a
white one that a cat gave me. they’re of no use; they wouldn’t make a
mouthful for a sparrow.”

“maybe they will for a boy, though,” said the magician thoughtfully. “i
shouldn’t be in the least surprised if they were magic seeds. at any
rate, they are of no use as they are, and you may as well plant them
and see what will come up.”

“there’s no earth to plant them in,” said hansel.

“that’s no matter,” replied the magician. “magic seeds do not need
earth. just lay one of them down in a corner and say over it:--

  i plant thee, seed,
  now in my need.
  be not afraid
  to lend thy aid.”

so many strange things had come to pass that hansel was almost afraid
to have anything to do with the seeds; but he finally decided to plant
the yellow one, and then, if nothing dreadful happened, to plant
the black one, and after that, the white. he laid the yellow one
down gently, repeated the magician’s spell over it, and turned away.
before he could get across the little room, he felt something touch
his shoulder. it was a branch of a tree, and was loaded with bright
red apples; another was full of thick slices of bread and butter well
sprinkled with sugar; from another hung many little buckets of creamy
milk; another was weighted down with cake and gingerbread; another with
sugar cookies; and yet another with tender, juicy roast beef and roast
chicken. while he stood gazing at all these things, the tree kept on
growing; and even before the hungry boy could put out his hand for a
single mouthful, it had almost reached the top of the room, and every
branch had something good on it.

hansel threw himself on the floor beside the crack in the wall and
told the magician of the amazing thing that had happened. “i wish i
could get through this wall,” he said, “so i could give you something
to eat. can’t you dig through it?” he asked eagerly. “haven’t you any
knife?”

“the giants took it away,” replied the magician; “but never mind. since
your seeds are magic seeds, there is hope for us, and i don’t mind
going hungry for a while. be quick and plant another and see what will
come of it.”

hansel planted the tiny black seed, saying over the same magic spell.
he did not turn his back this time, you may be sure; but now, although
a little shoot came up at once, it grew more slowly, and it was at
least ten minutes before it bore any fruit. even when the fruit
appeared, it did not look very valuable, for it was only one pod, long
and brown and thick. hansel told the magician about it, and before
he had fairly finished speaking, he heard something drop heavily on
the floor behind him. the pod had ripened and burst and the fruit had
fallen out--the biggest, sharpest, strongest jackknife that was ever
made in all the world.

“oh, oh!” cried hansel. “now, mr. magician, i can dig through this
wall.”

that would not have been so easily done with any common knife; but this
one actually seemed to dig of itself, for whether hansel was holding
it or not, it kept on working and the bits of stone kept on falling.
it was not many minutes before the hole was large enough for a boy to
creep through; and through it hansel went with his hands full of bread
and butter and gingerbread and roast beef.

if only there had been no giants to fear, the boy and the magician
would have had a delightful time together. even as it was, they had so
much to tell that for a little while they forgot all about the third
seed. at last the magician thought of it and he said:--

“there is no knowing how soon the giants may come upon us. hurry back
and plant the third seed and see what help that will give us.”

then hansel crept back and planted the little white seed. that was
even slower than the black one in coming up; but yet it was not many
minutes before it was up to hansel’s knees and had begun to form its
fruit. never was there such fruit seen before. it was perfectly white
and round and hard. after a while it fell off, and hansel in great
disappointment carried it to the magician.

“here it is,” he said, “but it is no good at all. it looks just like a
piece of chalk.”

much to his surprise, the magician clapped his hands and cried:--

“this is best of all. now we are safe. come giant or dwarf or troll or
demon, they cannot harm us.”

hansel was afraid the magician had gone mad, but in a moment he
understood. the white fruit really was chalk, and in only two or three
seconds longer than no time at all, the magician was down on his knees,
drawing a magic circle about himself and the boy as fast as ever he
could.

“there!” he said, with a deep sigh of relief. “nothing can hurt us now.
there’s something else for you to know. the magic seeds were given to
you, and, therefore, you have the right to ask three questions. what is
the first?”

it did not take hansel long to think what he wanted to know, and
without a moment’s delay he cried:--

“please tell me where is the terrible giant with three eyes?”

“he lies dead outside the gate of the castle,” said a voice.

“where is the one with the three mouths?”

“his feet are in the air, his head in the water, and he is drowned as
dead as a stone,” replied the voice.

“and where is the one with the three ears?”

“he stands outside the dungeon and is just about to open the door,” was
the reply; and sure enough, the bolts were drawn, the key was turned,
and the giant humpkin strode into the room.

“how did you get here, you young rascal, you?” he roared. “i put you
into the other dungeon to wait till i came to eat you. you’ll pay for
this, you will.” humpkin caught him by the arm, or rather, tried to
catch him, for the instant the giant put one foot within the circle,
something or other struck him a heavy blow. he tried again, and this
time he was struck so terribly that he howled with pain and fright and
ran for his life, leaving all the doors wide open behind him.

“come,” cried the magician; “come quick!” he caught the boy by the hand
and half dragged him out of the dungeon. “stay there,” he said when
they had come to the courtyard, and he himself ran through the gate
of the castle. then, while humpkin was half running and half rolling
down the mountain, the magician, too, was running as fast as he could
go, making a wide chalk mark entirely around the castle. when this was
done, he went back into the court, not troubling himself to close the
gate, and called to hansel.

“come, let’s go up into the tower,” he said, “and see what will happen.”

they climbed to the top of the highest tower and looked around. pretty
soon they saw humpkin come stumbling up the hill, snarling and growling
and by turns rubbing his head and shaking his great fist. “i’ll be
there,” he muttered, “and then you’ll pay for this, you will. i’ll eat
you both before you can say--‘oh! oh!’” he screeched, for again he had
touched the magic circle, and a third blow, worse than either of the
others, had sent him a quarter of a league from the gate. he tried
again and again, but as he made the third attempt, a swarm of bees flew
into his face, buzzing and stinging so savagely that they drove him
over the cliff. this cliff was so high that he broke into pieces long
before he reached the bottom, such small pieces that as yet no one has
ever found even one of them.

after the magician and hansel had seen the last of the giant, they came
down from the tower and began to look through the castle. of course
there were, as in every giant’s castle, rooms upon rooms filled from
floor to ceiling with silver and gold; there were others fairly crammed
with diamonds and rubies and emeralds and pearls.

“you will be the richest boy in the whole land,” said the magician.
“you are king, of course.”

“why, aren’t you going to be king?” asked the boy, with wide-open eyes.

“king? no, not i. i am a magician,” was the proud reply. “only let me
have a quiet tower where no one ever slams the doors or interrupts me
when i am making my calculations, and i would not give a fig for all
the gold and jewels in the castle. but come, now, and let us go down
into the dungeons. there may be some one else shut up there.”

down into the dungeons they went. the giant’s keys were sticking in the
door of the dungeon where the magician had been shut up. room after
room was unlocked, but no one was to be seen.

“we must have been the only prisoners,” said the magician. “there seem
to be no more rooms.”

“i thought i saw a little door out of that dark place under the
stairs,” hansel said. “maybe that’s a room.”

“we’ll see,” said the magician, and he tried key after key, but none
of them fitted. “i fancy there’s a touch of magic about this,” he said
thoughtfully. “some magician must have been here and made this lock.
there’s one thing sure, what magic has done, magic can undo.”

he drew a circle entirely around the little door and wrote some
mysterious figures and signs within it. he had hardly finished the last
one before the door flung itself open. there stood a tall, stately
man, and by his side was a beautiful woman with her arm thrown closely
around a young girl two or three years older than hansel.

now comes the strangest part of the whole story and the one that is
hardest to believe, for these three people proved to be hansel’s father
and mother and sister. they had really been stolen away by trolls, as
their friends thought, and had been put into the dungeon of the giants
for safe-keeping. the trolls had been overcome by other trolls who
were stronger than they and put to death. the giants were not used to
remembering things, and they had forgotten all about their prisoners.
luckily, hansel’s father had some magic food in his pockets, or else
they would have starved long before. there they were, alive and well;
and now hansel, the lonely little boy whom nobody wanted, had a father
and mother and sister, a powerful friend, and rooms upon rooms filled
with gold and silver from floor to ceiling.

the doors of the castle keep were flung wide open. the sun shone in and
the sweet, strong wind blew through and through it until every corner
was fresh and pure. little flowers began to grow in the courtyard.
they showed their faces timidly at first, but soon there were great
companies of them, bright and cheery and happy as ever flowers could
be. vines ran up the walls and peered over into the very keep of the
castle. some even slipped in through the gratings of the dungeons to
see what kind of places they were. night and day the gates stood
open, for there were no enemies to be afraid of. hansel grew into a
tall young man, and he ruled the country so kindly and wisely that
the people declared there never was in all the wide world so good a
sovereign as their own king hansel the first.




the star princess




the star princess


there was great rejoicing at the royal palace. flags waved from every
tower. bright-colored silken streamers floated from every window. each
maidservant had been given a new gown and each servingman a broad
silver piece. little bells were tinkling joyously. soft strains of
music came from one corner and another. the rejoicing was not only at
the palace, but throughout the island kingdom. men and women took a
holiday from their work. children went about the streets singing. when
night came, every window was ablaze with light and every hilltop was
glowing with a bonfire; for the king and queen had a little daughter.
her eyes were as blue as the ocean, her skin was as white as its foam,
and her hair was as yellow as the gleam of the sunlight on the sand.

by and by there was a magnificent christening feast. kings and nobles
and princes and witches and magicians and fairies were all invited.
every one came and every one gave the beautiful baby princess his very
best wishes.

“the king is a happy man to have a child like that,” said one guest to
another as they were leaving the palace.

“true,” replied the other, “but he did not look happy. did not you
notice how troubled his face was and how strangely he acted? when some
one pushed the curtains aside for a bit of air, did you see how quickly
he ran to the window and drew them together again with his own hands,
and looked at the baby as if he was afraid it would disappear at a ray
of daylight? i am sure that he is anxious about something. the queen
is not. she is as happy as the day is long.”

“i should think she would be. she has everything in the world that she
wants, and not one thing to trouble her.”

when all the guests had gone and the candles had burned low, the king
went to the queen and said:--

“my queen, i have something very sad to tell you. can you bear it?”

“i can bear anything with such a child as this,” she replied.

then the king said:--

“when my father was a young, young man, he was so bewitched by the
spells of a mermaid that he was ready to give up his kingdom and follow
her into the sea. his councillors begged of him to leave her, the court
magicians tried in every way to break her spells, but they could not
succeed. while they were waving their wands and saying over their
charms, she lay on a rock out in the sea and laughed them to scorn. ‘go
on,’ she said. ‘keep him if you can. i’ll have his soul yet in spite of
all you can do.’ at last all the priests in the kingdom came together.
each one took a great vase of holy water, and they walked entirely
around the island, sprinkling the shore as they went. the wicked
mermaid could not cross the ring of holy water. day after day she lay
on the rock by the shore, calling and calling the prince to come to
her; but the priests had done their work so thoroughly that he had no
longer any wish to go to the wicked creature. when she found that she
had lost him, she shrieked with rage and anger and pronounced seven
dreadful curses upon him. six of them the priests could overthrow, but
there was one over which they had no power, because it did not affect
the prince himself, but his first grandchild.”

“and that is our baby!” said the queen, clasping the little princess
closer in her arms.

“yes,” replied the king, “and the curse was this: if she once looks
upon the ocean before the end of her eighteenth year, sorrow shall come
to her and to all who love her.”

the king and the queen talked together sadly about what they should do
to save their little daughter. the kingdom was one large island. the
palace was on a high hill in the very middle of the island, and from
every room in the palace the ocean could be seen.

“couldn’t we give up the kingdom and go somewhere to live far, far away
from the ocean?” asked the queen, with tearful eyes.

“no,” replied the king. “there is no heir to the throne save our little
daughter; and if i should go away, there would be war. i have no right
to bring war upon my people even to save my child.”

all night long they talked and planned, and when morning came, they
hoped they had found a way to save the princess. a band of white silk
was bound about the pretty blue eyes, and four of the most trusty women
in the kingdom were chosen to be the child’s nurses. these were the
orders that the king gave them:--

“two of you must be with her by night and two by day. she must never
be left alone for one moment. the band about her eyes must never be
removed except at night, and then it must be replaced before the first
ray of light in the morning.” if the princess passed her eighteenth
birthday in safety, each one of them was to have ten thousand pieces
of gold.

year after year went on, and the princess still wore the bandage over
her eyes. if she ventured to lay a finger upon it, she was punished as
severely as if she had been the child of a peasant; but in everything
else she did exactly as she liked. whatever she asked for was always
given her and whatever she wished to have done was done at once. some
princesses would have become haughty and disagreeable, but this one was
always kind-hearted and unselfish.

the king had made no secret of the sad story. indeed, every one in the
kingdom knew it except the princess herself; and the people loved her
so much that they were almost as eager as her parents for her to pass
her eighteenth birthday in safety. “they say her eyes are like stars,”
whispered the people; and gradually they forgot the many names that
had been given her when she was christened and spoke of her only as the
star princess. wherever she went, she was guarded not only by two of
her nurses, but also by all of her father’s subjects who chanced to be
in sight. she had never seen the ocean or the sun or had even a single
glimpse of daylight, and yet she was the happiest, merriest little
maiden in the world. one reason for this was that she did not know that
she was at all different from other people. when little girls were
brought to play with her, their eyes were always bandaged like her own,
and they played only such games as they could play blindfolded. no one
was allowed even to mention the sun or the daylight or the ocean in her
presence. “why do people never uncover their eyes until the candles are
lighted for dinner?” she once asked. and the nurses replied, “because
before that time eyes are so ugly that no one can bear to look at them.”

one day she asked suddenly, “what is the strange sound that we hear all
the time? it is like murmuring and sighing and sobbing and singing.
sometimes it groans and sometimes it almost laughs. nurses, what is it?”

“it is your greatest enemy,” the nurses replied.

“it must be a dragon,” thought the princess, and she asked, “why
doesn’t my father drive it away?”

“he would if he could,” the nurses answered, “but it is stronger than
he. it never can come any nearer, however; so all its groaning will not
hurt you.”

as time passed and the star princess grew older, she asked more and
more questions. “she must be amused,” declared the king. he sent out
his orders and one morning a great troop of workmen appeared at the
palace with spades and pickaxes. they were to dig down, down, into the
earth, for there a wonderful ballroom was to be made which the king
meant should be the most beautiful one in all the world. the walls
were of white marble, and over them from floor to ceiling were most
exquisite traceries all made in jewels. there were trees drawn with
emeralds and beryl, beds of scarlet poppies made of the clearest and
most brilliant rubies; there were roses made of pearls and garnets and
topaz stones; there were forget-me-nots of the bluest turquoise; there
were violets of amethyst; and all about and among the trees and flowers
were birds of sapphires and diamonds. in this room the star princess
was always safe, for not a ray of sunlight could ever enter it. it was
anything but gloomy, however, for when the hundreds of candles were
lighted, it was such a blaze of brightness and color that one might
almost fancy it was the very home of the rainbows. it was no wonder
that people came from near and far to see the marvelous room, for there
was not another one like it in all the world. here entertainments of
all sorts were given, for the king was ready to do anything to amuse
the star princess and keep her from being lonely or unhappy or from
asking questions that he did not wish to answer.

at last she came to the end of her eighteenth year. the next day, at
precisely four o’clock in the morning, she would be eighteen years
old, and then there would be no more danger. the king and queen were
so happy that they hardly knew what to do. there was to be a splendid
ball, of course, on the night of her birthday, and they had busied
themselves in planning to make it the most brilliant fête that the
island kingdom had ever seen.

“but i should so like to have her all to ourselves on that day,” the
queen had said wistfully. “couldn’t we give the ball on the eve of her
birthday? she will be with us and with the whole roomful of dancers.
nothing could possibly happen to her then.”

the king was not quite pleased with the idea, but he had finally
yielded, and the ball had been arranged to come on the eve of her
birthday.

invitations were sent to the kings and queens and princes and
princesses of many and many a kingdom, and every one was accepted. for
seven days before the ball, ships whose sails were of cloth of silver
and cloth of gold were continually coming up to the royal wharves. all
day long the king’s golden chariots were going and coming between
the palace and the shore to bring up the guests. there was music and
feasting and merriment of all sorts, and on the evening of the seventh
day came the ball. after all were assembled, the king led in the
star princess. she was dressed in a gown of white, of some wonderful
material that glowed like opals in a soft, subdued light and flashed
like diamonds when the light was stronger. her golden hair almost
touched the floor, and gleamed like sunshine. around her waist and
her neck were rows and rows of pearls, and above her forehead shone
one diamond star. she was so lovely that more than one noble prince
said to himself, “she is surely a fairy. no mortal maiden was ever so
beautiful.”

among the guests there was one who had not been invited, but who was,
nevertheless, the most welcome of all. he was the son of the greatest
king in that part of the world, but in his babyhood he had been stolen
away by trolls. he had just been rescued and was on his way to take
possession of his kingdom. when his ship came near the island kingdom,
strains of music floated down from the palace, and there at the wharves
lay the royal vessels of many and many a sovereign with the royal
pennants streaming in the wind.

“what does that mean?” the prince asked.

“it must be a great ball,” replied his attendants.

“i never went to a ball in my life,” said the prince; and he added with
a grim smile, “we did not have balls in the palace of the trolls.”

“would your highness wish to attend this one?” suggested his
companions, for they, too, had much curiosity to see what was going
on in the island kingdom. “of course your highness knows that there is
no court on this side of the world that would not feel honored by your
presence.”

the end of it was that the prince, too, moored his vessel at the royal
wharves and rode up to the palace in the royal chariot, and received a
most royal welcome. he was presented to the star princess at once, of
course, and from that moment he could not keep his eyes from her. he
danced with her again and again. he seized every opportunity to talk
with her, and she was very willing to listen. he told her about his
having been stolen away by trolls. “but now,” he said, “i have a good
ship. the sea is calm, the sun is bright, there is a fair wind, and
soon i shall be in my own kingdom.”

the star princess looked puzzled. “i think i can guess what a ship is,”
she said. “it must be a little like a palace; but i don’t know what
the sea is or the sun.”

the prince stared in amazement. “why, the sun is above us and it gives
us warmth and light,” he said; “though i am sure it never shone so
bright as your beautiful eyes.”

“i have never seen this strange sun,” the star princess said. “candles
give light, but how can there be any light without them?”

“can she be out of her right mind?” thought the prince. he said no
more about the sun, but began to talk about the beautiful room and the
jewels that were flashing and gleaming.

the star princess, however, had no idea of dropping the subject. “but
what is the sea?” she asked. “you said you came in your ship on the
sea. what is the sea?”

when the prince looked into her clear, calm blue eyes, he could not
believe that she was not in her right mind, and he began in a dazed
fashion to try to tell her about the sea. “it’s water,” he said, “and
it lies all around the island, and ships sail on it.”

“does it murmur and sing and sigh and moan and laugh?” asked the star
princess eagerly.

“why, yes, i suppose it does,” replied the prince, a little doubtfully.

“then it must be the dragon,” declared the star princess. “surely you
have seen the dragon. my nurses say that it lies around the island, but
that it will never hurt me. is the sea a dragon?”

“yes--no--the sea is just the sea,” returned the puzzled young prince.
“i can’t explain it exactly, but if you should look out of your window,
you would see it, i am sure. it must be in view from every window
in the palace. look out to-morrow morning at sunrise. the sea is
beautiful. it is dark and blue, it is like your own glorious eyes. i am
so eager to see them in the daylight.”

“is daylight before dinner?” the star princess asked. “people’s eyes
are very ugly before dinner, you know; and that is why they always
wear bandages over them till the table is spread and the candles are
lighted.” then the star princess was called away to meet some other one
of the great folk who had come to the ball, and she saw no more of the
prince.

all night long and until three o’clock in the morning the dancing and
feasting and merriment went on. soon after three the star princess left
the room, and her going was the signal for the breaking-up of the ball.
the prince lingered, and when he made his farewell to the king and the
queen, he asked if he might speak with them on a most important matter.
of course they said yes, for of course they guessed what it was. then
he told them that the star princess had won his heart, and he begged
of them to give her to him to be his bride. “i know well that i am not
worthy of her,” he said humbly, “but i will do everything in my power
to make her happy. at her slightest wish i will give my wealth and
my life as freely as you would pour out this glass of water,” and he
caught up a glass of water that stood on the banquet table and emptied
it.

the king and the queen were glad and they were sorry. they liked the
bearing and manner of the young prince, and they knew that he was the
sovereign of the richest kingdom in that part of the world. they were
glad to have their daughter become his queen, but it did seem hard that
they should not have her to themselves for a while after the time had
come when they could enjoy her without having to guard her and watch
her so carefully. at last the king said:--

“if it is the wish of our daughter, we will give her to you for your
bride, but you must first leave her with us for a year and a day that
we may accustom ourselves to the thought of losing her.”

of course the prince could only agree to so moderate a condition as
this. then they told him the story of the mermaid’s curse, and that on
her first day of freedom no one but her father and her mother were to
see her; and he went away to wait impatiently until her birthday should
have passed.

now when the star princess left the ballroom and went to her own room,
two of the nurses went with her as usual. she had little to say, for
her thoughts were all on the young prince and his words to her. “the
sun--the sea,” she said to herself; “what can they mean?” then she
remembered that he had said, “look out of your window at sunrise and
you will see it.” just what “sunrise” meant, she did not know; but
whatever it might be, she meant to look out of the window just once
before the nurses put back the band over her eyes. she said to one of
them:--

“nurse, i am so thirsty. will you get me some water from the north side
of the well that is on the north side of the palace.”

for a moment the nurse hesitated. then she said to herself, “the
servants are not up yet, and it would be a pity to call one just for
this. to-day is her eighteenth birthday, and nothing can harm her
now,” so one nurse started to go down the stairs. the other nurse was
putting away the opal-like gown and the diamond star and the ropes
of pearls. she stepped into another room for a moment, and the star
princess quickly pulled the curtains apart and took her first look at
the sunrise and the sea. she gazed and gazed at them. it was all so
beautiful that she could not turn away, and when the nurse came back,
there she stood.

“o my princess,” the nurse exclaimed, “what have you done,
what have you done!” just then the bell on the castle rang,
“one--two--three--four!” it was four o’clock in the morning, and the
star princess was full eighteen years of age. then the nurse thought,
“ten thousand broad pieces of gold is a great deal to lose. it was only
a moment before the time, and surely no harm is done. perhaps it will
never be known.” she concluded to say nothing about the matter, and to
the star princess she said, “i thought you must have hurt yourself, and
i was frightened. now go to your bed and rest awhile, for to-day you
are to be happier than ever before.”

the star princess was so used to obeying her nurses that she went
meekly to bed and even allowed them to put the band over her eyes as
usual; but she was puzzled and confused. in that one long look she had
found that no dragon, but a thing more beautiful than anything she had
ever seen before even in her dreams lay around the island kingdom.
what could it mean? why had she never been allowed to see it? what
was that glorious light that came up from the blue and was a thousand
times brighter than the candles? over and over she said to herself,
“sun--sea--ship,” but she could not solve the mystery. she lay as if
asleep until the time came to go to her father and her mother. then she
heard the whole story of the wicked mermaid and the seventh curse. “now
you are free,” they said joyfully. she took a hand of each parent and
roamed over the palace from garret to cellar, gazing from window after
window upon the glorious ocean and the deep blue sky. they went out of
doors, and she saw the trees, the flowers, and the birds. she watched
the rippling of the waves on the shore. every hour was more delightful
than those before it. at last came the glory of the sunset, and she
exclaimed, “oh, this is even more beautiful than the sunrise!”

“but what do you know of the sunrise?” her father asked gravely, and
she told him of her one look from the window. both her parents were
troubled, but the star princess was so happy that they could not bear
to alarm her. then, too, they said to themselves, “it was only a
moment before the clock struck, and surely no harm can come of it.”

so the happy day went on. when evening was fully come, the mother sat
with her arm about her daughter and the father told her very gently
about the love of the prince and his wish to make her his queen.
“to-morrow you will see him,” said the king, “and if you are willing to
be his wife, he will come for you in a year and a day.”

it was easy to see from the face of the star princess that the prince
would be welcome when he came. “we will talk more of this in the
morning,” said the king, as he kissed his daughter good-night.

the star princess went to her own rooms, and after her maids had left
her, she was alone for the first time in her life. she drew aside the
curtains and stood gazing upon the ocean in the moonlight. she listened
to its music. at first it seemed to murmur peacefully to itself.
then she fancied that it sobbed and moaned. then she heard clearly a
sweet voice that called, “come to me, come, maiden, come to me!” it
was a richer, more exquisite melody than she had ever heard before;
and as she listened, she found herself answering, “yes, i will come,
i will come.” she went softly down the stairs and out of the door.
every one else in the palace was asleep, and no one hindered her. she
slipped down the hillside in the shadows and went nearer and nearer to
the shore. the voice still called. sometimes it was low and gentle,
sometimes it was loud and strong; but whether low or loud, it drew the
star princess toward it as if it were a magic cord. she followed it
along the shore until she found herself on a steep cliff that towered
far above the sea. the waters beat upon the rocks at its base, the
breakers boomed and thundered; but out of all the wild uproar still
came that enchanting voice, calling, “come to me, come to me, come,
come!” straight to the very edge of the cliff went the star princess.
for a moment she thought of her father and her mother, of the prince
who was coming in the morning to tell her of his love, and she drew
back; but the voice called with a bewitching sweetness and charm,
“come, star princess, come.” she held out her arms and answered, “yes,
i come,” and sprang from the edge of the cliff.

a triumphant howl rang out above all the roaring of the waters:--

“i have you now, grandchild of a faithless prince, and you shall pay
the forfeit of his falseness. you did not see the ocean for eighteen
years, but you shall see it now.” and the cruel mermaid, for she it
was who had bewitched the star princess and drawn her from her home,
laughed so savagely and unpityingly that the heart of the maiden almost
ceased to beat.

she was alone and in the hands of the wicked mermaid. “oh, my father,
my mother!” she cried. “my prince, my prince, save me, save me!” but
the mermaid clutched her roughly and dragged her to the palace of her
son, the merking who ruled the waters for leagues around.

“here is the grandchild of the man who scorned my love,” she shrieked.
“what shall she suffer? by what death shall she die?”

the merking looked upon the star princess. her eyes were cast down in
fear, her hair was wild and tangled, her cheeks were pale, and she
trembled with fright, but even then she was beautiful, and the merking
said:--

[illustration: “she is fairer than any of my maidens”]

“she is fairer than any of my maidens. she shall not be put to death
to-day. i will have her for my wife, and when i am tired of her, then
you may torment her and kill her as you will. come with me, earth
maiden.”

“oh, no, no,” cried the star princess. “let me die! i will never be
your wife.”

“it is far too noble a fate for her,” grumbled the cruel mermaid. “such
as she should not have honors like that. will you be my son’s bride or
will you not?” she demanded.

“oh, no, never, never!” answered the star princess, with a shudder.

“then you shall be tormented with such tortures as you never dreamed
of,” cried the mermaid angrily; and she caught hold of the star
princess to drag her away.

“not yet,” interposed the merking. “you know how to give hard tasks.
give her a task or two, and she will be glad enough to be free from you
and come to me.”

“tasks she shall have,” declared the mermaid, “and such ones that she
will plead and beg to come to you. come, earth creature,” she called;
and, clutching her prisoner, she dragged her away to a horrible cavern
full of sea-monsters. to one of them she said, “go with the earth
creature and do not let her out of your sight.” then she turned to
the star princess. “my son’s throne needs jewels,” she said. “go, and
within three days bring me ten thousand pearls.”

the star princess was in despair; but it was worse, she thought, to be
the bride of the merking than even to have the dreadful sea-monster for
a jailer, and she followed him meekly.

“where do you intend to go?” he asked.

“indeed, i do not know,” she replied.

“then you may as well stay here,” the sea-monster said, with a horrible
grin.

“oh, i don’t dare,” moaned the star princess. “what shall i do! what
shall i do!”

even the sea-monster could not help being just a little sorry for her,
and he said grimly:--

“you can come this way if you like. it is better than staying there.”
and she followed him gladly, for anything was better than staying with
the merking and his mother.

as they went on through the water, she noticed a little sculpin that
seemed determined to go with them. it was ugly, indeed, but it kept
between her and the sea-monster, and she was grateful. somehow she
felt that the little creature was her friend; and when it came nearer
and even touched her hand, she did not draw back, but was glad of its
company.

after a long, long while, the sea-monster stopped before a bank of
jagged rocks.

“there are the pearl oysters,” it said, “thousands of them. perhaps
you can get them to give up their treasures.” the creature laughed
scornfully and added, “you can’t get away very well, and i shall take a
nap. wake me when you get your pearls.”

the star princess was in despair, but as soon as the monster was fairly
asleep, the little sculpin had something to say.

“star princess,” he whispered, “i was once stolen by trolls.” the star
princess started, for her prince, too, had met the same fate. “when i
was rescued,” continued the sculpin, “the troll was forced to make me
three gifts. one of them was that i should have the power to persuade
all honest creatures of earth, air, and water to do my will. this ledge
is covered with oysters, and i think they will gladly give you their
pearls.” he swam close to the ledge and spoke softly to the oysters. in
a moment pearls were falling like raindrops. the star princess picked
them up, and there were far more than ten thousand. she carried them
back to the mermaid, and the mermaid cried:--

“so you got the pearls, did you? that was an easy task. how did you
like your journey? you shall have another to-morrow.”

when the morning had come, the mermaid said:--

“i wish to know how many grains of sand there are on the beach that
lies to the north of my son’s kingdom. one of my creatures shall take
you there, and if you do not count aright, then at the end of three
days you shall lose one of those blue eyes that you are so proud of. a
wooden one is good enough for a girl who cannot use what she has.”

the star princess was put in the charge of a sea-monster far more
horrible than the one that had gone with her before. “i shall have to
show you the way to the beach,” he said, “but you’ll get no other help
from me, understand that.”

the star princess was in despair, for the friendly sculpin was nowhere
to be seen, and how could she ever count all the grains of sand on a
beach. when they had come to the shore, she took up a handful of sand
and tried to count the grains, but of course it was hopeless.

“you may as well kill me,” she cried to the sea-monster, “for i cannot
do this.”

“oh, the mermaid will kill you in her own way. you need not fear that
she will leave you alive,” retorted the sea-monster, and grinned at her
most horribly. “go to work. for three days you are to count grains of
sand; but be quiet about it and don’t disturb me.” in two minutes the
creature was fast asleep.

suddenly the star princess heard all around her a gentle rustling, as
if the softest of the breezes were touching lightly the tiniest leaves
of the forest. in a moment she found that it was made by thousands
upon thousands of little sand fleas hopping toward her. “our friend,
the sculpin, has asked us to help you,” they said, “and we have been
counting as fast as ever we could. lie down and rest, and in one hour
longer, the task will be done.”

when the third day had come, the sea-monster took the maiden back to
the mermaid.

“how many grains of sand are on the beach?” the mermaid demanded.

the star princess told her, and she had to admit that it was the right
number. she was very angry to find that the task had been done, and she
actually shrieked with rage. then she cried, “will you marry my son,
you wretch, or will you go on another journey? you need not think that
you will get off from this one so easily. will you marry him?”

“no, i will not,” declared the star princess; and she would not yield
even when the mermaid gnashed her teeth in a fury and screamed, “you
shall have a task to-morrow that is a task. this is only child’s play.”

when morning had come, the mermaid said:--

“the sharks once rebelled against my son, and he has never punished
their leader as he deserved. go you to the waters of the sharks, take
their king prisoner, and bring him to me to pay the penalty of his
rebellion. one of my people will show you the way.” and she pointed out
a sea-monster more dreadful than both the others put together.

the monster led the way, and the star princess followed. “oh, if i
could only see my father and my mother once more,” she thought. “how
could i think the voice of the mermaid was sweet! i should be so
happy if i were only the lowest servant in my father’s house. and the
prince--i wonder--”

“here you are,” said the monster; “that is, you are as near as i intend
to go. i’m not going to risk my head and fins in the waters of the
sharks. i’ll wait here till the third day, but i rather think the
sharks will save me the trouble of carrying you home.”

       *       *       *       *       *

now while all this was going on in the water world, there was the
deepest amazement and sorrow in the island kingdom, for the star
princess had disappeared. in the morning of the second day of her
nineteenth year, her maids waited and waited for her call. at last
they went to her door. it stood ajar, and they could see that she was
not in the room. “she is so happy in being free,” they said, “that she
has slipped out into the palace gardens to see the world in the early
morning.” so they searched the gardens through and through. they ran
hither and yon, and looked into every corner of the palace; but no
star princess was to be seen. then they went to the king, weeping and
wailing and wringing their hands, and cried:--

“o your majesty, the star princess has disappeared! oh, oh, what shall
we do! what shall we do!”

the royal guests were still at the palace, and in three minutes every
one of them had heard the distressing news. then began a search that
was a search. every corner, every crack of the great palace was looked
into, not only once but over and over, for each one thought that he
might perhaps see something that the others had passed by. then the
gardens were searched and the forests and the fields. all the subjects
of the kingdom gave up their work and joined in the hunt. every inch of
the seashore was gone over and over, until it seemed as if some one had
looked under every blade of grass and into every mouse-hole. they went
to the cliff, of course, but the light steps of the princess had left
no trace, and they could not even guess what had become of her.

the king was heartbroken, and the queen lay on her bed, moaning her
life away; but the young prince was even more wretched than they. “her
father and mother have had her all those eighteen years,” he said to
himself, “but i have found her only to lose her again.”

after the island kingdom had been searched through and through, the
king sent out every ship in the navy to look for his child, and all the
stranger kings and princes whose ships lay at the royal wharves put out
to sea to try to find the star princess. they sailed north and south
and east and west, but they all came back with lowered flags and the
same report, “we cannot find her.”

the days passed. the royal guests bade farewell to the sorrowing king
and queen and sailed away to their own kingdoms, all but one, the
faithful young prince. “i cannot leave the place where i first met
her,” he said to her parents. “will you let me stay with you for a
time?” of course they were only too glad to have him; but one morning
the young prince, too, was missing. he had vanished from the island
kingdom as suddenly as the star princess. it was known that he had left
his rooms in the palace late in the evening; but this was a thing that
he often did, especially on such moonlight nights as the one on which
the princess had vanished. so many times he had been seen pacing to and
fro on the sand that no one thought of watching him or of noticing when
he returned to the palace.

after he, too, disappeared, the beach was searched as closely as it had
been for the star princess. the print of his footsteps was seen and
they were traced up and down the sand, then to one side toward a high
hill. on the path up the hill, little twigs had been broken, and here
and there a leaf had been bruised and crushed; and so it was known that
he had climbed to the top of the hill. he was traced still farther, to
the very edge of a cliff that overhung sharp rocks and a wild commotion
of breakers. the people looked upon them sadly and shook their heads.
“poor prince,” they said, “his love for the star princess has made him
mad and he has flung himself over the cliff.” but one sage old man,
who had seen many strange things in his long life, shook his head and
muttered, “not madness but magic.”

if the breakers that beat on the base of the cliff had chosen to speak,
they, too, would have said, “not madness but magic.” the prince had
gone out on the shore, as he so often went, and that night he heard the
same sweet voice that had called the star princess into the sea. “come
to me, come to me,” it cried, now low and sweet, now loud and strong,
but ever so powerful that even the prince could hardly resist it.
suddenly, in the midst of the strength and the sweetness, there came a
wail that tore his very heart. “my prince, my prince,” it said, “save
me, save me!” and without a glance behind him he sprang straight off
the cliff and into the raging sea.

“aha, now i have two of you!” shrieked the mermaid with fiendish
delight. then, when she looked upon him more closely and saw how tall
and noble and beautiful he was, she hesitated. “i will not tear you
limb from limb,” she said. “i have a daughter who will soon take a
husband, and if she chooses you, you may live.”

“i will have no false mermaid for a wife,” declared the young prince,
as boldly as if he had still been in the palace of the island kingdom.

“you will not?” shrieked the mermaid. “how dare you insult my daughter,
you earthborn creature!” she waved her hands to and fro before his
face. his eyes closed, and for a moment he was in a deep slumber. when
he awoke, the mermaid had gone. he was alone, but he was no longer a
handsome young prince; she had put upon him the form of a sculpin.

prince or sculpin, he had but one thought, to find the star princess;
and he swam as rapidly as he could, first in one direction, then in
another, until he came in sight of the waterworld den where the mermaid
and her monsters dwelt. it was just at the moment when the mermaid was
sending out the star princess and the sea-monster to find the ten
thousand pearls.

“i cannot rescue her yet,” said the prince to himself, “but at least
i can save her from the torments of the mermaid.” so he kept out of
sight until the mermaid had gone back into her den. then he hastened
after the star princess, and it was he who had kept between her and the
monster and who had persuaded the pearl oysters to give her of their
pearls. it was he, too, who had induced the sand fleas to count the
grains of sand for her. she did not know this, and she had seen no more
of him after her first journey. now she stood in terror, gazing into
the waters of the sharks. the horrible creatures swam about and dived
and rolled over and showed their sharp, white teeth. the star princess
was in an agony of terror. she could not run away, for the sea-monster
was behind her, and he was almost as dreadful as the sharks.

“go on,” he cried mockingly. “tell them you want their king. the
earth-girl who will not marry our merking is only fit for sharks’ food.”

the star princess looked so pitiful and so beautiful that even the
sea-monster was as nearly touched as a monster could be. he muttered,
“it _is_ rather a pity to have her eaten up.”

then he called to her:--

“girl, earth-girl, if you will agree to marry our king, i will take you
back without the shark, and if she is angry, i think i know a way to
save you.”

“oh, no, no,” she replied, shuddering. “i can never marry the merking.”

“then go on and be devoured by the sharks,” growled the monster, “but
you may as well be about it. if you keep me waiting much longer, i
will eat you myself.”

the star princess turned toward the waters of the sharks. as she gazed
in terror, she saw the ugly little sculpin coming toward her, and
behind him swam the whole company of sharks.

“don’t be afraid,” the sculpin called as they swept by. “only wait. you
are safe.”

the star princess waited. she was all alone in the vast ocean, for
at the coming of the sharks, the sea-monster had fled for his life.
she covered her eyes with her hands for fear she should see something
dreadful; but it was not long before she felt a soft touch. it was the
friendly sculpin. “come quick,” he said. “there is not a moment to
lose. the sharks are fighting the merking and his monsters. follow me.
do not be afraid, i can find the way, for the second gift of my troll
jailer was that i should never fail to find the place that i sought.”

the little sculpin swam to the land faster than ever sculpin had swum
before, and the princess ran after him faster than ever princess had
run before. she dared not glance behind her for fear of seeing some of
the horrible creatures. at last they were so far away that the sculpin
knew there was no more danger of pursuit. they had come to the shore.
there he stopped and said:--

“star princess, now you are safe. rest for a little and then you shall
go home to the palace of the island kingdom.”

the star princess burst into tears of joy. “you have saved me,” she
cried. “what shall i do for you? my father is a king and he will give
you whatever you ask. he will build a wall around an ocean for you if
you wish and drive away from it every creature that would trouble you.
he will--” and there she stopped, for, try her best, she could not
think of anything else that would be at all likely to please a sculpin.

the ugly little fish replied:--

“star princess, my rightful home is not in the sea, but on the land.
i was born in a palace larger and more beautiful than that of your
father. i fell into the hands of the wicked mermaid, and she threw over
me the sculpin form that i now wear.”

“my father has wizards and magicians at his court,” cried the star
princess eagerly, “and surely some one among them can free you from the
mermaid’s power.”

“i am under a power that you alone can free me from,” declared the
sculpin. “i am the sovereign of a kingdom larger and richer than your
father’s. i am but a little older than yourself. they tell me i am
handsome. you can free me if you will stroke my head three times and
say--”

“and say what?” cried the star princess.

“and say, ‘i promise to marry you as soon as we have come to my
father’s palace,’” the sculpin answered.

“oh, no, no,” cried the star princess. “i will do anything but that.
i will give you everything i have, and when the kingdom is mine, you
shall have that, too, and i will go out into the world and beg my
bread, but i cannot marry any one except my own prince.”

“and are you so sure that he will care to take a portionless bride?”
asked the sculpin.

the maiden looked down upon the sand, then out upon the water, then she
answered softly:--

“even if he refused me, i could never marry any one else; but,” she
added, “i am sure that he will want me.”

“so am i,” said a manly voice behind her, and, behold, there stood
the prince himself, for the third gift of the troll was that no magic
should have power to change his form against his will. he had kept
the form of a sculpin for a while because he knew he could be of more
service to the princess in that shape. they sat down on the yellow
sand, and he told her the long, long story of his love and his sorrow,
of his remaining in her father’s kingdom that he might at least be near
the place where he had first seen her, of his pacing up and down the
shore and thinking of her, and at last of his springing from the cliff
because he was sure that he heard her voice crying, “my prince, save
me, save me!”

“but look about you, my star princess,” he said. “do you not know this
shore and this cliff towering over our heads? these waves beat upon
the coast of your father’s kingdom. come, let us go to the palace.”

he took hold of her hand and led her across the sandy shore, up the
little hill, over a grassy meadow where flowers sprang up wherever they
stepped. then they went through the woods, where the pathway was soft
with pine needles and the air was rich with fragrance, and so on to the
palace of the king.

at one of the upper windows stood the queen, gazing sadly over the
water. the king was by her side. his arm was thrown around her, and he
seemed to be trying to comfort her. the prince and the star princess
waved their hands to them; but they were looking far out to the
horizon, and the wanderers were up the hill and into the palace and
close beside them before they had any idea that their loneliness was
at an end.

such a welcoming as there was! the queen wept for the suffering that
they had all been through, and she laughed for joy that they were
together again. everybody in the kingdom had a whole year of holidays.
the prisoners were set free. there were feasts upon feasts for all
who chose to partake of them. the grass was greener, the flowers were
brighter. there were such blue skies and such soft little clouds as had
never been seen over the land before. the birds no longer stayed in the
forest, but came freely into the city. they perched upon windows and
fences and balconies and sang more sweetly than ever birds sang before.

after a year and a day of this rejoicing came the wedding of the prince
and the star princess. just as the wedding procession was setting off
for the church, some one noticed a great sea-turtle toiling up the hill
to the palace.

“i want to see the king,” he called, waving a flipper to call his
attention.

the procession waited till the turtle had come up the hill. then the
king went forward cordially, and said:--

“you are welcome, friend turtle. have you come to the wedding?”

“yes,” the turtle gasped, for he was not used to climbing such high
hills, and he had not yet fully caught his breath; “but i have
something to say to you. i have just come from the waterworld, and i
have brought you some news.”

“and what is that?” cried the king anxiously, for even now he was
afraid of the power of the cruel mermaid.

“the war is ended,” said the turtle. “the merking, the mermaid, and all
their monsters are killed and devoured. neither you nor your queen nor
the prince nor the star princess has an enemy on the land or in the
sea.”

then the bells throughout the whole kingdom rang for joy, the drums
beat, the trumpets blew, and the banners waved, all of their own accord.

“bring another chariot,” ordered the king. another chariot was brought,
and the turtle was helped into it. it took its place just behind the
bridal party, and they all rode away to the wedding.


the end




  the riverside press
  cambridge . massachusetts
  u . s . a




transcriber’s notes:


  italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  perceived typographical errors have been corrected.

  inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.





*** end of the project gutenberg ebook the house with the silver door ***


    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™

project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.

the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.

﻿the project gutenberg ebook of frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this ebook.

title: frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus

author: mary wollstonecraft shelley

release date: october 1, 1993 [ebook #84]
                most recently updated: september 8, 2025

language: english

credits: judith boss, christy phillips, lynn hanninen and david meltzer. html version by al haines.
        further corrections by menno de leeuw.


*** start of the project gutenberg ebook frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus ***

frankenstein;

or, the modern prometheus

by mary wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley


 contents

 letter 1
 letter 2
 letter 3
 letter 4
 chapter 1
 chapter 2
 chapter 3
 chapter 4
 chapter 5
 chapter 6
 chapter 7
 chapter 8
 chapter 9
 chapter 10
 chapter 11
 chapter 12
 chapter 13
 chapter 14
 chapter 15
 chapter 16
 chapter 17
 chapter 18
 chapter 19
 chapter 20
 chapter 21
 chapter 22
 chapter 23
 chapter 24




letter 1

_to mrs. saville, england._


st. petersburgh, dec. 11th, 17—.


you will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the
commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil
forebodings. i arrived here yesterday, and my first task is to assure
my dear sister of my welfare and increasing confidence in the success
of my undertaking.

i am already far north of london, and as i walk in the streets of
petersburgh, i feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which
braces my nerves and fills me with delight. do you understand this
feeling? this breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards
which i am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes.
inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent
and vivid. i try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of
frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the
region of beauty and delight. there, margaret, the sun is for ever
visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a
perpetual splendour. there—for with your leave, my sister, i will put
some trust in preceding navigators—there snow and frost are banished;
and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be wafted to a land surpassing in
wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable
globe. its productions and features may be without example, as the
phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered
solitudes. what may not be expected in a country of eternal light? i
may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle and may
regulate a thousand celestial observations that require only this
voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent for ever. i
shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world
never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by
the foot of man. these are my enticements, and they are sufficient to
conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce me to commence this
laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little
boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his
native river. but supposing all these conjectures to be false, you
cannot contest the inestimable benefit which i shall confer on all
mankind, to the last generation, by discovering a passage near the pole
to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are
requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at
all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine.

these reflections have dispelled the agitation with which i began my
letter, and i feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me
to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to tranquillise the mind as
a steady purpose—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual
eye. this expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years. i
have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have
been made in the prospect of arriving at the north pacific ocean
through the seas which surround the pole. you may remember that a
history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the
whole of our good uncle thomas’ library. my education was neglected,
yet i was passionately fond of reading. these volumes were my study
day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which
i had felt, as a child, on learning that my father’s dying injunction
had forbidden my uncle to allow me to embark in a seafaring life.

these visions faded when i perused, for the first time, those poets
whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted it to heaven. i also
became a poet and for one year lived in a paradise of my own creation;
i imagined that i also might obtain a niche in the temple where the
names of homer and shakespeare are consecrated. you are well
acquainted with my failure and how heavily i bore the disappointment.
but just at that time i inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my
thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.

six years have passed since i resolved on my present undertaking. i
can, even now, remember the hour from which i dedicated myself to this
great enterprise. i commenced by inuring my body to hardship. i
accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the north sea;
i voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; i often
worked harder than the common sailors during the day and devoted my
nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those
branches of physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive
the greatest practical advantage. twice i actually hired myself as an
under-mate in a greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration. i
must own i felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second
dignity in the vessel and entreated me to remain with the greatest
earnestness, so valuable did he consider my services.

and now, dear margaret, do i not deserve to accomplish some great purpose?
my life might have been passed in ease and luxury, but i preferred glory to
every enticement that wealth placed in my path. oh, that some encouraging
voice would answer in the affirmative! my courage and my resolution is
firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are often depressed. i am
about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which
will demand all my fortitude: i am required not only to raise the spirits
of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing.

this is the most favourable period for travelling in russia. they fly
quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in
my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an english stagecoach. the
cold is not excessive, if you are wrapped in furs—a dress which i have
already adopted, for there is a great difference between walking the
deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when no exercise
prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins. i have no
ambition to lose my life on the post-road between st. petersburgh and
archangel.

i shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my
intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by paying the
insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as i think necessary
among those who are accustomed to the whale-fishing. i do not intend to
sail until the month of june; and when shall i return? ah, dear sister, how
can i answer this question? if i succeed, many, many months, perhaps years,
will pass before you and i may meet. if i fail, you will see me again soon,
or never.

farewell, my dear, excellent margaret. heaven shower down blessings on you,
and save me, that i may again and again testify my gratitude for all your
love and kindness.

your affectionate brother,

r. walton




letter 2

_to mrs. saville, england._

archangel, 28th march, 17—.


how slowly the time passes here, encompassed as i am by frost and snow!
yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise. i have hired a
vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom i have
already engaged appear to be men on whom i can depend and are certainly
possessed of dauntless courage.

but i have one want which i have never yet been able to satisfy, and the
absence of the object of which i now feel as a most severe evil, i have no
friend, margaret: when i am glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there
will be none to participate my joy; if i am assailed by disappointment, no
one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. i shall commit my thoughts
to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium for the communication of
feeling. i desire the company of a man who could sympathise with me, whose
eyes would reply to mine. you may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but i
bitterly feel the want of a friend. i have no one near me, gentle yet
courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as of a capacious mind, whose
tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans. how would such a
friend repair the faults of your poor brother! i am too ardent in execution
and too impatient of difficulties. but it is a still greater evil to me
that i am self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my life i ran wild
on a common and read nothing but our uncle thomas’ books of voyages.
at that age i became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own
country; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its
most important benefits from such a conviction that i perceived the
necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native
country. now i am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many
schoolboys of fifteen. it is true that i have thought more and that my
daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want (as the painters
call it) _keeping;_ and i greatly need a friend who would have sense
enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection enough for me to
endeavour to regulate my mind.

well, these are useless complaints; i shall certainly find no friend on the
wide ocean, nor even here in archangel, among merchants and seamen. yet
some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these
rugged bosoms. my lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful courage
and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase
more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. he is an
englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices,
unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of
humanity. i first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel;
finding that he was unemployed in this city, i easily engaged him to assist
in my enterprise.

the master is a person of an excellent disposition and is remarkable in the
ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. this
circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made
me very desirous to engage him. a youth passed in solitude, my best years
spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the
groundwork of my character that i cannot overcome an intense distaste to
the usual brutality exercised on board ship: i have never believed it to be
necessary, and when i heard of a mariner equally noted for his kindliness
of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, i felt
myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services. i heard
of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the
happiness of her life. this, briefly, is his story. some years ago he loved
a young russian lady of moderate fortune, and having amassed a considerable
sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented to the match. he saw
his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was bathed in
tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her,
confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that he was poor,
and that her father would never consent to the union. my generous friend
reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover,
instantly abandoned his pursuit. he had already bought a farm with his
money, on which he had designed to pass the remainder of his life; but he
bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his
prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young
woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. but the old
man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who,
when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned
until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her
inclinations. “what a noble fellow!” you will exclaim. he is
so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a turk, and a kind
of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct
the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which
otherwise he would command.

yet do not suppose, because i complain a little or because i can
conceive a consolation for my toils which i may never know, that i am
wavering in my resolutions. those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage
is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. the
winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it
is considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps i may sail
sooner than i expected. i shall do nothing rashly: you know me
sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the
safety of others is committed to my care.

i cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my
undertaking. it is impossible to communicate to you a conception of
the trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which
i am preparing to depart. i am going to unexplored regions, to “the
land of mist and snow,” but i shall kill no albatross; therefore do not
be alarmed for my safety or if i should come back to you as worn and
woeful as the “ancient mariner.” you will smile at my allusion, but i
will disclose a secret. i have often attributed my attachment to, my
passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that
production of the most imaginative of modern poets. there is something
at work in my soul which i do not understand. i am practically
industrious—painstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and
labour—but besides this there is a love for the marvellous, a belief
in the marvellous, intertwined in all my projects, which hurries me out
of the common pathways of men, even to the wild sea and unvisited
regions i am about to explore.

but to return to dearer considerations. shall i meet you again, after
having traversed immense seas, and returned by the most southern cape of
africa or america? i dare not expect such success, yet i cannot bear to
look on the reverse of the picture. continue for the present to write to
me by every opportunity: i may receive your letters on some occasions when
i need them most to support my spirits. i love you very tenderly. 
remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again.

your affectionate brother,
 robert walton




letter 3

_to mrs. saville, england._

july 7th, 17—.


my dear sister,

i write a few lines in haste to say that i am safe—and well advanced
on my voyage. this letter will reach england by a merchantman now on
its homeward voyage from archangel; more fortunate than i, who may not
see my native land, perhaps, for many years. i am, however, in good
spirits: my men are bold and apparently firm of purpose, nor do the
floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers
of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. we
have already reached a very high latitude; but it is the height of
summer, and although not so warm as in england, the southern gales,
which blow us speedily towards those shores which i so ardently desire
to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth which i had not
expected.

no incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a
letter. one or two stiff gales and the springing of a leak are
accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record, and
i shall be well content if nothing worse happen to us during our voyage.

adieu, my dear margaret. be assured that for my own sake, as well as
yours, i will not rashly encounter danger. i will be cool,
persevering, and prudent.

but success _shall_ crown my endeavours. wherefore not? thus far i
have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars
themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. why not
still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? what can stop the
determined heart and resolved will of man?

my swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. but i must
finish. heaven bless my beloved sister!

r.w.




letter 4


_to mrs. saville, england._

august 5th, 17—.

so strange an accident has happened to us that i cannot forbear
recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before
these papers can come into your possession.

last monday (july 31st) we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed
in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which
she floated. our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we
were compassed round by a very thick fog. we accordingly lay to,
hoping that some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.

about two o’clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out
in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to
have no end. some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to
grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly
attracted our attention and diverted our solicitude from our own
situation. we perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by
dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of half a mile; a
being which had the shape of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature,
sat in the sledge and guided the dogs. we watched the rapid progress
of the traveller with our telescopes until he was lost among the
distant inequalities of the ice.

this appearance excited our unqualified wonder. we were, as we believed,
many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that
it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. shut in, however, by
ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the
greatest attention.

about two hours after this occurrence we heard the ground sea, and before
night the ice broke and freed our ship. we, however, lay to until the
morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which
float about after the breaking up of the ice. i profited of this time to
rest for a few hours.

in the morning, however, as soon as it was light, i went upon deck and
found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently
talking to someone in the sea. it was, in fact, a sledge, like that we
had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night on a large
fragment of ice. only one dog remained alive; but there was a human
being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel.
he was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of
some undiscovered island, but a european. when i appeared on deck the
master said, “here is our captain, and he will not allow you to perish
on the open sea.”

on perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in english, although with a
foreign accent. “before i come on board your vessel,” said he,
“will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?”

you may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed
to me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom i should have
supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which he would not
have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. i
replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards the
northern pole.

upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented to come on board.
good god! margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for
his safety, your surprise would have been boundless. his limbs were
nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and
suffering. i never saw a man in so wretched a condition. we attempted
to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as he had quitted the fresh
air he fainted. we accordingly brought him back to the deck and
restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to
swallow a small quantity. as soon as he showed signs of life we
wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the
kitchen stove. by slow degrees he recovered and ate a little soup,
which restored him wonderfully.

two days passed in this manner before he was able to speak, and i often
feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. when he
had in some measure recovered, i removed him to my own cabin and
attended on him as much as my duty would permit. i never saw a more
interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression of
wildness, and even madness, but there are moments when, if anyone
performs an act of kindness towards him or does him any the most
trifling service, his whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with
a beam of benevolence and sweetness that i never saw equalled. but he
is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes he gnashes his
teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him.

when my guest was a little recovered i had great trouble to keep off
the men, who wished to ask him a thousand questions; but i would not
allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of body
and mind whose restoration evidently depended upon entire repose.
once, however, the lieutenant asked why he had come so far upon the ice
in so strange a vehicle.

his countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest gloom, and
he replied, “to seek one who fled from me.”

“and did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?”

“yes.”

“then i fancy we have seen him, for the day before we picked you up we
saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice.”

this aroused the stranger’s attention, and he asked a multitude of
questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called him, had
pursued. soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, “i have,
doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good
people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries.”

“certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in me to
trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.”

“and yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation; you have
benevolently restored me to life.”

soon after this he inquired if i thought that the breaking up of the
ice had destroyed the other sledge. i replied that i could not answer
with any degree of certainty, for the ice had not broken until near
midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at a place of safety
before that time; but of this i could not judge.

from this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the
stranger. he manifested the greatest eagerness to be upon deck to watch for
the sledge which had before appeared; but i have persuaded him to remain in
the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere.
i have promised that someone should watch for him and give him instant
notice if any new object should appear in sight.

such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the
present day. the stranger has gradually improved in health but is very
silent and appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin.
yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all
interested in him, although they have had very little communication
with him. for my own part, i begin to love him as a brother, and his
constant and deep grief fills me with sympathy and compassion. he must
have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck
so attractive and amiable.

i said in one of my letters, my dear margaret, that i should find no friend
on the wide ocean; yet i have found a man who, before his spirit had been
broken by misery, i should have been happy to have possessed as the brother
of my heart.

i shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals,
should i have any fresh incidents to record.




august 13th, 17—.


my affection for my guest increases every day. he excites at once my
admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. how can i see so
noble a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant
grief? he is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and
when he speaks, although his words are culled with the choicest art,
yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.

he is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck,
apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. yet, although
unhappy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own misery but that he
interests himself deeply in the projects of others. he has frequently
conversed with me on mine, which i have communicated to him without
disguise. he entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my
eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures i had taken
to secure it. i was easily led by the sympathy which he evinced to use the
language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul
and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly i would
sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my
enterprise. one man’s life or death were but a small price to pay for
the acquirement of the knowledge which i sought, for the dominion i should
acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race. as i spoke, a
dark gloom spread over my listener’s countenance. at first i
perceived that he tried to suppress his emotion; he placed his hands before
his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed me as i beheld tears trickle
fast from between his fingers; a groan burst from his heaving breast. i
paused; at length he spoke, in broken accents: “unhappy man! do you
share my madness? have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught? hear me;
let me reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!”

such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the
paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened
powers, and many hours of repose and tranquil conversation were
necessary to restore his composure.

having conquered the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise
himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of
despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. he asked
me the history of my earlier years. the tale was quickly told, but it
awakened various trains of reflection. i spoke of my desire of finding a
friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than
had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that a man could
boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing.

“i agree with you,” replied the stranger; “we are
unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than
ourselves—such a friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to
perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. i once had a friend, the most
noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting
friendship. you have hope, and the world before you, and have no cause for
despair. but i—i have lost everything and cannot begin life
anew.”

as he said this his countenance became expressive of a calm, settled
grief that touched me to the heart. but he was silent and presently
retired to his cabin.

even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he
does the beauties of nature. the starry sky, the sea, and every sight
afforded by these wonderful regions seem still to have the power of
elevating his soul from earth. such a man has a double existence: he
may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he
has retired into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit that has a
halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures.

will you smile at the enthusiasm i express concerning this divine
wanderer? you would not if you saw him. you have been tutored and
refined by books and retirement from the world, and you are therefore
somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more fit to
appreciate the extraordinary merits of this wonderful man. sometimes i
have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which he possesses that
elevates him so immeasurably above any other person i ever knew. i
believe it to be an intuitive discernment, a quick but never-failing
power of judgment, a penetration into the causes of things, unequalled
for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a
voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music.




august 19th, 17—.


yesterday the stranger said to me, “you may easily perceive, captain
walton, that i have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes. i had
determined at one time that the memory of these evils should die with
me, but you have won me to alter my determination. you seek for
knowledge and wisdom, as i once did; and i ardently hope that the
gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine
has been. i do not know that the relation of my disasters will be
useful to you; yet, when i reflect that you are pursuing the same
course, exposing yourself to the same dangers which have rendered me
what i am, i imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one
that may direct you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you
in case of failure. prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually
deemed marvellous. were we among the tamer scenes of nature i might
fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things
will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would
provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers
of nature; nor can i doubt but that my tale conveys in its series
internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed.”

you may easily imagine that i was much gratified by the offered
communication, yet i could not endure that he should renew his grief by
a recital of his misfortunes. i felt the greatest eagerness to hear
the promised narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from a strong
desire to ameliorate his fate if it were in my power. i expressed
these feelings in my answer.

“i thank you,” he replied, “for your sympathy, but it is
useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled. i wait but for one event, and then i
shall repose in peace. i understand your feeling,” continued he,
perceiving that i wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my
friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; nothing can alter my
destiny; listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is
determined.”

he then told me that he would commence his narrative the next day when i
should be at leisure. this promise drew from me the warmest thanks. i have
resolved every night, when i am not imperatively occupied by my duties, to
record, as nearly as possible in his own words, what he has related during
the day. if i should be engaged, i will at least make notes. this
manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, who
know him, and who hear it from his own lips—with what interest and
sympathy shall i read it in some future day! even now, as i commence my
task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me
with all their melancholy sweetness; i see his thin hand raised in
animation, while the lineaments of his face are irradiated by the soul
within. strange and harrowing must be his story, frightful the storm which
embraced the gallant vessel on its course and wrecked it—thus!




chapter 1


i am by birth a genevese, and my family is one of the most
distinguished of that republic. my ancestors had been for many years
counsellors and syndics, and my father had filled several public
situations with honour and reputation. he was respected by all who
knew him for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public
business. he passed his younger days perpetually occupied by the
affairs of his country; a variety of circumstances had prevented his
marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that he became a
husband and the father of a family.

as the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, i cannot
refrain from relating them. one of his most intimate friends was a
merchant who, from a flourishing state, fell, through numerous
mischances, into poverty. this man, whose name was beaufort, was of a
proud and unbending disposition and could not bear to live in poverty
and oblivion in the same country where he had formerly been
distinguished for his rank and magnificence. having paid his debts,
therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his
daughter to the town of lucerne, where he lived unknown and in
wretchedness. my father loved beaufort with the truest friendship and
was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances.
he bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to a conduct
so little worthy of the affection that united them. he lost no time in
endeavouring to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin
the world again through his credit and assistance.

beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was ten
months before my father discovered his abode. overjoyed at this discovery,
he hastened to the house, which was situated in a mean street near the
reuss. but when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. beaufort
had saved but a very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes, but
it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in
the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a
merchant’s house. the interval was, consequently, spent in inaction;
his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had leisure for
reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end
of three months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion.

his daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw
with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing and that
there was no other prospect of support. but caroline beaufort
possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support
her in her adversity. she procured plain work; she plaited straw and
by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to
support life.

several months passed in this manner. her father grew worse; her time
was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence
decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving
her an orphan and a beggar. this last blow overcame her, and she knelt
by beaufort’s coffin weeping bitterly, when my father entered the
chamber. he came like a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who
committed herself to his care; and after the interment of his friend he
conducted her to geneva and placed her under the protection of a
relation. two years after this event caroline became his wife.

there was a considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but
this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted
affection. there was a sense of justice in my father’s upright mind
which rendered it necessary that he should approve highly to love
strongly. perhaps during former years he had suffered from the
late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set
a greater value on tried worth. there was a show of gratitude and
worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the
doting fondness of age, for it was inspired by reverence for her
virtues and a desire to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing
her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace
to his behaviour to her. everything was made to yield to her wishes
and her convenience. he strove to shelter her, as a fair exotic is
sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her
with all that could tend to excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and
benevolent mind. her health, and even the tranquillity of her hitherto
constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through. during
the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had
gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after
their union they sought the pleasant climate of italy, and the change
of scene and interest attendant on a tour through that land of wonders,
as a restorative for her weakened frame.

from italy they visited germany and france. i, their eldest child, was born
at naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their rambles. i remained
for several years their only child. much as they were attached to each
other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very
mine of love to bestow them upon me. my mother’s tender caresses and
my father’s smile of benevolent pleasure while regarding me are my
first recollections. i was their plaything and their idol, and something
better—their child, the innocent and helpless creature bestowed on
them by heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose future lot it was in
their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled
their duties towards me. with this deep consciousness of what they owed
towards the being to which they had given life, added to the active spirit
of tenderness that animated both, it may be imagined that while during
every hour of my infant life i received a lesson of patience, of charity,
and of self-control, i was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but
one train of enjoyment to me.

for a long time i was their only care. my mother had much desired to have a
daughter, but i continued their single offspring. when i was about five
years old, while making an excursion beyond the frontiers of italy, they
passed a week on the shores of the lake of como. their benevolent
disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. this, to my
mother, was more than a duty; it was a necessity, a
passion—remembering what she had suffered, and how she had been
relieved—for her to act in her turn the guardian angel to the
afflicted. during one of their walks a poor cot in the foldings of a vale
attracted their notice as being singularly disconsolate, while the number
of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst
shape. one day, when my father had gone by himself to milan, my mother,
accompanied by me, visited this abode. she found a peasant and his wife,
hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing a scanty meal to
five hungry babes. among these there was one which attracted my mother far
above all the rest. she appeared of a different stock. the four others were
dark-eyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair. her
hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her
clothing, seemed to set a crown of distinction on her head. her brow was
clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and the moulding of
her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold
her without looking on her as of a distinct species, a being heaven-sent,
and bearing a celestial stamp in all her features.

the peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and
admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. she was
not her child, but the daughter of a milanese nobleman. her mother was a
german and had died on giving her birth. the infant had been placed with
these good people to nurse: they were better off then. they had not been
long married, and their eldest child was but just born. the father of their
charge was one of those italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory
of italy—one among the _schiavi ognor frementi,_ who exerted
himself to obtain the liberty of his country. he became the victim of its
weakness. whether he had died or still lingered in the dungeons of austria
was not known. his property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and
a beggar. she continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude
abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles.

when my father returned from milan, he found playing with me in the hall of
our villa a child fairer than pictured cherub—a creature who seemed
to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter
than the chamois of the hills. the apparition was soon explained. with his
permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their
charge to her. they were fond of the sweet orphan. her presence had seemed
a blessing to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty
and want when providence afforded her such powerful protection. they
consulted their village priest, and the result was that elizabeth lavenza
became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than
sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and
my pleasures.

everyone loved elizabeth. the passionate and almost reverential
attachment with which all regarded her became, while i shared it, my
pride and my delight. on the evening previous to her being brought to
my home, my mother had said playfully, “i have a pretty present for my
victor—tomorrow he shall have it.” and when, on the morrow, she
presented elizabeth to me as her promised gift, i, with childish
seriousness, interpreted her words literally and looked upon elizabeth
as mine—mine to protect, love, and cherish. all praises bestowed on
her i received as made to a possession of my own. we called each other
familiarly by the name of cousin. no word, no expression could body
forth the kind of relation in which she stood to me—my more than
sister, since till death she was to be mine only.




chapter 2


we were brought up together; there was not quite a year difference in
our ages. i need not say that we were strangers to any species of
disunion or dispute. harmony was the soul of our companionship, and
the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us
nearer together. elizabeth was of a calmer and more concentrated
disposition; but, with all my ardour, i was capable of a more intense
application and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge.
she busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets;
and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our swiss
home —the sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons,
tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of
our alpine summers—she found ample scope for admiration and delight.
while my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the
magnificent appearances of things, i delighted in investigating their
causes. the world was to me a secret which i desired to divine.
curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature,
gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the
earliest sensations i can remember.

on the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave
up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native
country. we possessed a house in geneva, and a _campagne_ on belrive,
the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a
league from the city. we resided principally in the latter, and the
lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion. it was my
temper to avoid a crowd and to attach myself fervently to a few. i was
indifferent, therefore, to my school-fellows in general; but i united
myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them. henry
clerval was the son of a merchant of geneva. he was a boy of singular
talent and fancy. he loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for
its own sake. he was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. he
composed heroic songs and began to write many a tale of enchantment and
knightly adventure. he tried to make us act plays and to enter into
masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of
roncesvalles, of the round table of king arthur, and the chivalrous
train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands
of the infidels.

no human being could have passed a happier childhood than myself. my
parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence.
we felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to
their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights
which we enjoyed. when i mingled with other families i distinctly
discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assisted
the development of filial love.

my temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement; but by some
law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits
but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things
indiscriminately. i confess that neither the structure of languages,
nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states
possessed attractions for me. it was the secrets of heaven and earth
that i desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of
things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man
that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical,
or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the world.

meanwhile clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral
relations of things. the busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes,
and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was
to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the
gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species. the saintly soul
of elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home.
her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of
her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us. she was
the living spirit of love to soften and attract; i might have become
sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that
she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness. and
clerval—could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of clerval? yet
he might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his
generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for
adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the real loveliness of
beneficence and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring
ambition.

i feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood,
before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of
extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. besides,
in drawing the picture of my early days, i also record those events which
led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when i would
account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my
destiny i find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost
forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent
which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.

natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; i desire,
therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my
predilection for that science. when i was thirteen years of age we all went
on a party of pleasure to the baths near thonon; the inclemency of the
weather obliged us to remain a day confined to the inn. in this house i
chanced to find a volume of the works of cornelius agrippa. i opened it
with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful
facts which he relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. a new
light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy, i communicated my
discovery to my father. my father looked carelessly at the title page of my
book and said, “ah! cornelius agrippa! my dear victor, do not waste
your time upon this; it is sad trash.”

if, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me
that the principles of agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a modern
system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers
than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while
those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances i
should certainly have thrown agrippa aside and have contented my
imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my
former studies. it is even possible that the train of my ideas would never
have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin. but the cursory glance
my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he was
acquainted with its contents, and i continued to read with the greatest
avidity.

when i returned home my first care was to procure the whole works of this
author, and afterwards of paracelsus and albertus magnus. i read and
studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me
treasures known to few besides myself. i have described myself as always
having been imbued with a fervent longing to penetrate the secrets of
nature. in spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern
philosophers, i always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied.
sir isaac newton is said to have avowed that he felt like a child picking
up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth. those of his
successors in each branch of natural philosophy with whom i was acquainted
appeared even to my boy’s apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same
pursuit.

the untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted
with their practical uses. the most learned philosopher knew little
more. he had partially unveiled the face of nature, but her immortal
lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery. he might dissect,
anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, causes
in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. i
had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that seemed to keep
human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and
ignorantly i had repined.

but here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew
more. i took their word for all that they averred, and i became their
disciple. it may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth
century; but while i followed the routine of education in the schools of
geneva, i was, to a great degree, self-taught with regard to my favourite
studies. my father was not scientific, and i was left to struggle with a
child’s blindness, added to a student’s thirst for knowledge.
under the guidance of my new preceptors i entered with the greatest
diligence into the search of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir
of life; but the latter soon obtained my undivided attention. wealth was an
inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if i could
banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any but
a violent death!

nor were these my only visions. the raising of ghosts or devils was a
promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which
i most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, i
attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a
want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. and thus for a time i was
occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand
contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very slough of
multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish
reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.

when i was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near
belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunderstorm. it
advanced from behind the mountains of jura, and the thunder burst at once
with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. i remained,
while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight.
as i stood at the door, on a sudden i beheld a stream of fire issue from an
old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so
soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing
remained but a blasted stump. when we visited it the next morning, we found
the tree shattered in a singular manner. it was not splintered by the
shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood. i never beheld
anything so utterly destroyed.

before this i was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of
electricity. on this occasion a man of great research in natural
philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, he entered on
the explanation of a theory which he had formed on the subject of
electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to me.
all that he said threw greatly into the shade cornelius agrippa,
albertus magnus, and paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by
some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined me to pursue my
accustomed studies. it seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever
be known. all that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew
despicable. by one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps
most subject to in early youth, i at once gave up my former
occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as a deformed
and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a
would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of
real knowledge. in this mood of mind i betook myself to the
mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as
being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.

thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments
are we bound to prosperity or ruin. when i look back, it seems to me
as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the
immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my life—the last effort
made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even
then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me. her victory was
announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which
followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting
studies. it was thus that i was to be taught to associate evil with
their prosecution, happiness with their disregard.

it was a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual.
destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and
terrible destruction.




chapter 3


when i had attained the age of seventeen my parents resolved that i
should become a student at the university of ingolstadt. i had
hitherto attended the schools of geneva, but my father thought it
necessary for the completion of my education that i should be made
acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. my
departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day
resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life
occurred—an omen, as it were, of my future misery.

elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and she was
in the greatest danger. during her illness many arguments had been urged to
persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her. she had at first
yielded to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her
favourite was menaced, she could no longer control her anxiety. she
attended her sickbed; her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity
of the distemper—elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this
imprudence were fatal to her preserver. on the third day my mother
sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the
looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. on her
deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert
her. she joined the hands of elizabeth and myself. “my
children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future happiness were
placed on the prospect of your union. this expectation will now be the
consolation of your father. elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to
my younger children. alas! i regret that i am taken from you; and, happy
and beloved as i have been, is it not hard to quit you all? but these are
not thoughts befitting me; i will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to
death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.”

she died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death.
i need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent
by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the
soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance. it is so
long before the mind can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day
and whose very existence appeared a part of our own can have departed
for ever—that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been
extinguished and the sound of a voice so familiar and dear to the ear
can be hushed, never more to be heard. these are the reflections of
the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the
evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. yet from whom has
not that rude hand rent away some dear connection? and why should i
describe a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? the time at
length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity; and
the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a
sacrilege, is not banished. my mother was dead, but we had still
duties which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the
rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the
spoiler has not seized.

my departure for ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events,
was now again determined upon. i obtained from my father a respite of
some weeks. it appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the repose,
akin to death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick of
life. i was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me. i was
unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above
all, i desired to see my sweet elizabeth in some degree consoled.

she indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all.
she looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and
zeal. she devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call
her uncle and cousins. never was she so enchanting as at this time,
when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us.
she forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.

the day of my departure at length arrived. clerval spent the last
evening with us. he had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit
him to accompany me and to become my fellow student, but in vain. his
father was a narrow-minded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the
aspirations and ambition of his son. henry deeply felt the misfortune
of being debarred from a liberal education. he said little, but when
he spoke i read in his kindling eye and in his animated glance a
restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details
of commerce.

we sat late. we could not tear ourselves away from each other nor
persuade ourselves to say the word “farewell!” it was said, and we
retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the
other was deceived; but when at morning’s dawn i descended to the
carriage which was to convey me away, they were all there—my father
again to bless me, clerval to press my hand once more, my elizabeth to
renew her entreaties that i would write often and to bestow the last
feminine attentions on her playmate and friend.

i threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away and indulged in
the most melancholy reflections. i, who had ever been surrounded by
amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual
pleasure—i was now alone. in the university whither i was going i
must form my own friends and be my own protector. my life had hitherto
been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given me invincible
repugnance to new countenances. i loved my brothers, elizabeth, and
clerval; these were “old familiar faces,” but i believed myself
totally unfitted for the company of strangers. such were my reflections as
i commenced my journey; but as i proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. i
ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. i had often, when at home,
thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had
longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. 
now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to
repent.

i had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my
journey to ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. at length the
high white steeple of the town met my eyes. i alighted and was
conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as i pleased.

the next morning i delivered my letters of introduction and paid a visit to
some of the principal professors. chance—or rather the evil
influence, the angel of destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me
from the moment i turned my reluctant steps from my father’s
door—led me first to m. krempe, professor of natural philosophy. he
was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science. he
asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches
of science appertaining to natural philosophy. i replied carelessly, and
partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal
authors i had studied. the professor stared. “have you,” he
said, “really spent your time in studying such nonsense?”

i replied in the affirmative. “every minute,” continued m. krempe with
warmth, “every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly
and entirely lost. you have burdened your memory with exploded systems
and useless names. good god! in what desert land have you lived,
where no one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you
have so greedily imbibed are a thousand years old and as musty as they
are ancient? i little expected, in this enlightened and scientific
age, to find a disciple of albertus magnus and paracelsus. my dear
sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew.”

so saying, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of several books
treating of natural philosophy which he desired me to procure, and
dismissed me after mentioning that in the beginning of the following
week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon natural
philosophy in its general relations, and that m. waldman, a fellow
professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he
omitted.

i returned home not disappointed, for i have said that i had long
considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but i
returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any
shape. m. krempe was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a
repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in
favour of his pursuits. in rather a too philosophical and connected a
strain, perhaps, i have given an account of the conclusions i had come
to concerning them in my early years. as a child i had not been
content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural
science. with a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my
extreme youth and my want of a guide on such matters, i had retrod the
steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged the
discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists.
besides, i had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy.
it was very different when the masters of the science sought
immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now
the scene was changed. the ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit
itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in
science was chiefly founded. i was required to exchange chimeras of
boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.

such were my reflections during the first two or three days of my
residence at ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming
acquainted with the localities and the principal residents in my new
abode. but as the ensuing week commenced, i thought of the information
which m. krempe had given me concerning the lectures. and although i
could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver
sentences out of a pulpit, i recollected what he had said of m.
waldman, whom i had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.

partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, i went into the lecturing
room, which m. waldman entered shortly after. this professor was very
unlike his colleague. he appeared about fifty years of age, but with an
aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his
temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black. his person
was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest i had ever heard.
he began his lecture by a recapitulation of the history of chemistry and
the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing
with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers. he then took
a cursory view of the present state of the science and explained many of
its elementary terms. after having made a few preparatory experiments, he
concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which i
shall never forget:

“the ancient teachers of this science,” said he,
“promised impossibilities and performed nothing. the modern masters
promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that
the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem
only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or
crucible, have indeed performed miracles. they penetrate into the recesses
of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. they ascend into the
heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of
the air we breathe. they have acquired new and almost unlimited powers;
they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even
mock the invisible world with its own shadows.”

such were the professor’s words—rather let me say such the words of
the fate—enounced to destroy me. as he went on i felt as if my soul
were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one the various keys were
touched which formed the mechanism of my being; chord after chord was
sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception,
one purpose. so much has been done, exclaimed the soul of
frankenstein—more, far more, will i achieve; treading in the steps
already marked, i will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers, and
unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.

i closed not my eyes that night. my internal being was in a state of
insurrection and turmoil; i felt that order would thence arise, but i
had no power to produce it. by degrees, after the morning’s dawn,
sleep came. i awoke, and my yesternight’s thoughts were as a dream.
there only remained a resolution to return to my ancient studies and to
devote myself to a science for which i believed myself to possess a
natural talent. on the same day i paid m. waldman a visit. his
manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public,
for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in
his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. i
gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as i had
given to his fellow professor. he heard with attention the little
narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of cornelius
agrippa and paracelsus, but without the contempt that m. krempe had
exhibited. he said that “these were men to whose indefatigable zeal
modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their
knowledge. they had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names
and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they in a
great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light. the
labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever
fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.” i
listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption
or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my
prejudices against modern chemists; i expressed myself in measured
terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his
instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have
made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended
labours. i requested his advice concerning the books i ought to
procure.

“i am happy,” said m. waldman, “to have gained a
disciple; and if your application equals your ability, i have no doubt of
your success. chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the
greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that
i have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, i have not
neglected the other branches of science. a man would make but a very sorry
chemist if he attended to that department of human knowledge alone. if your
wish is to become really a man of science and not merely a petty
experimentalist, i should advise you to apply to every branch of natural
philosophy, including mathematics.”

he then took me into his laboratory and explained to me the uses of his
various machines, instructing me as to what i ought to procure and
promising me the use of his own when i should have advanced far enough in
the science not to derange their mechanism. he also gave me the list of
books which i had requested, and i took my leave.

thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.




chapter 4


from this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the
most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation.
i read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination,
which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. i attended the
lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the
university, and i found even in m. krempe a great deal of sound sense
and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive
physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. in
m. waldman i found a true friend. his gentleness was never tinged by
dogmatism, and his instructions were given with an air of frankness and
good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. in a thousand ways
he smoothed for me the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse
inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension. my application was at
first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as i proceeded and
soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared in the
light of morning whilst i was yet engaged in my laboratory.

as i applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress
was rapid. my ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and
my proficiency that of the masters. professor krempe often asked me,
with a sly smile, how cornelius agrippa went on, whilst m. waldman
expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. two years
passed in this manner, during which i paid no visit to geneva, but was
engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries which i
hoped to make. none but those who have experienced them can conceive
of the enticements of science. in other studies you go as far as
others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in
a scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder.
a mind of moderate capacity which closely pursues one study must
infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that study; and i, who
continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was
solely wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of two
years i made some discoveries in the improvement of some chemical
instruments, which procured me great esteem and admiration at the
university. when i had arrived at this point and had become as well
acquainted with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as
depended on the lessons of any of the professors at ingolstadt, my
residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, i thought
of returning to my friends and my native town, when an incident
happened that protracted my stay.

one of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention was
the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with
life. whence, i often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed?
it was a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a
mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming
acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our
inquiries. i revolved these circumstances in my mind and determined
thenceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branches of
natural philosophy which relate to physiology. unless i had been
animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this
study would have been irksome and almost intolerable. to examine the
causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. i became
acquainted with the science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient; i
must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human body.
in my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my
mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors. i do not ever
remember to have trembled at a tale of superstition or to have feared
the apparition of a spirit. darkness had no effect upon my fancy, and
a churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of
life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become
food for the worm. now i was led to examine the cause and progress of
this decay and forced to spend days and nights in vaults and
charnel-houses. my attention was fixed upon every object the most
insupportable to the delicacy of the human feelings. i saw how the
fine form of man was degraded and wasted; i beheld the corruption of
death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; i saw how the worm
inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. i paused, examining and
analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change
from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this
darkness a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and
wondrous, yet so simple, that while i became dizzy with the immensity
of the prospect which it illustrated, i was surprised that among so
many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same
science, that i alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a
secret.

remember, i am not recording the vision of a madman. the sun does not
more certainly shine in the heavens than that which i now affirm is
true. some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the
discovery were distinct and probable. after days and nights of
incredible labour and fatigue, i succeeded in discovering the cause of
generation and life; nay, more, i became myself capable of bestowing
animation upon lifeless matter.

the astonishment which i had at first experienced on this discovery
soon gave place to delight and rapture. after so much time spent in
painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires was the
most gratifying consummation of my toils. but this discovery was so
great and overwhelming that all the steps by which i had been
progressively led to it were obliterated, and i beheld only the result.
what had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation
of the world was now within my grasp. not that, like a magic scene, it
all opened upon me at once: the information i had obtained was of a
nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as i should point them
towards the object of my search than to exhibit that object already
accomplished. i was like the arabian who had been buried with the dead
and found a passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly
ineffectual light.

i see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes
express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with
which i am acquainted; that cannot be; listen patiently until the end
of my story, and you will easily perceive why i am reserved upon that
subject. i will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as i then was,
to your destruction and infallible misery. learn from me, if not by my
precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of
knowledge and how much happier that man is who believes his native town
to be the world, than he who aspires to become greater than his nature
will allow.

when i found so astonishing a power placed within my hands, i hesitated
a long time concerning the manner in which i should employ it.
although i possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to
prepare a frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of
fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained a work of inconceivable
difficulty and labour. i doubted at first whether i should attempt the
creation of a being like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my
imagination was too much exalted by my first success to permit me to
doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful
as man. the materials at present within my command hardly appeared
adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but i doubted not that i should
ultimately succeed. i prepared myself for a multitude of reverses; my
operations might be incessantly baffled, and at last my work be
imperfect, yet when i considered the improvement which every day takes
place in science and mechanics, i was encouraged to hope my present
attempts would at least lay the foundations of future success. nor
could i consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any
argument of its impracticability. it was with these feelings that i
began the creation of a human being. as the minuteness of the parts
formed a great hindrance to my speed, i resolved, contrary to my first
intention, to make the being of a gigantic stature, that is to say,
about eight feet in height, and proportionably large. after having
formed this determination and having spent some months in successfully
collecting and arranging my materials, i began.

no one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like
a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. life and death
appeared to me ideal bounds, which i should first break through, and
pour a torrent of light into our dark world. a new species would bless
me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would
owe their being to me. no father could claim the gratitude of his
child so completely as i should deserve theirs. pursuing these
reflections, i thought that if i could bestow animation upon lifeless
matter, i might in process of time (although i now found it impossible)
renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption.

these thoughts supported my spirits, while i pursued my undertaking
with unremitting ardour. my cheek had grown pale with study, and my
person had become emaciated with confinement. sometimes, on the very
brink of certainty, i failed; yet still i clung to the hope which the
next day or the next hour might realise. one secret which i alone
possessed was the hope to which i had dedicated myself; and the moon
gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless
eagerness, i pursued nature to her hiding-places. who shall conceive
the horrors of my secret toil as i dabbled among the unhallowed damps
of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless
clay? my limbs now tremble, and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but
then a resistless and almost frantic impulse urged me forward; i seemed
to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. it was
indeed but a passing trance, that only made me feel with renewed
acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, i had
returned to my old habits. i collected bones from charnel-houses and
disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human
frame. in a solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house,
and separated from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase,
i kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from
their sockets in attending to the details of my employment. the
dissecting room and the slaughter-house furnished many of my materials;
and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation,
whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, i
brought my work near to a conclusion.

the summer months passed while i was thus engaged, heart and soul, in
one pursuit. it was a most beautiful season; never did the fields
bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant
vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. and the
same feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also
to forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom i had
not seen for so long a time. i knew my silence disquieted them, and i
well remembered the words of my father: “i know that while you are
pleased with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we shall
hear regularly from you. you must pardon me if i regard any
interruption in your correspondence as a proof that your other duties
are equally neglected.”

i knew well therefore what would be my father’s feelings, but i could
not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which
had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. i wished, as it
were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection
until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature,
should be completed.

i then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect
to vice or faultiness on my part, but i am now convinced that he was
justified in conceiving that i should not be altogether free from
blame. a human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and
peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to
disturb his tranquillity. i do not think that the pursuit of knowledge
is an exception to this rule. if the study to which you apply yourself
has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for
those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that
study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human
mind. if this rule were always observed; if no man allowed any pursuit
whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his domestic
affections, greece had not been enslaved, cæsar would have spared his
country, america would have been discovered more gradually, and the
empires of mexico and peru had not been destroyed.

but i forget that i am moralizing in the most interesting part of my
tale, and your looks remind me to proceed.

my father made no reproach in his letters and only took notice of my
silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before.
winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours; but i did not
watch the blossom or the expanding leaves—sights which before always
yielded me supreme delight—so deeply was i engrossed in my
occupation. the leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near
to a close, and now every day showed me more plainly how well i had
succeeded. but my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and i appeared
rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other
unwholesome trade than an artist occupied by his favourite employment.
every night i was oppressed by a slow fever, and i became nervous to a most
painful degree; the fall of a leaf startled me, and i shunned my fellow
creatures as if i had been guilty of a crime. sometimes i grew alarmed at
the wreck i perceived that i had become; the energy of my purpose alone
sustained me: my labours would soon end, and i believed that exercise and
amusement would then drive away incipient disease; and i promised myself
both of these when my creation should be complete.




chapter 5


it was on a dreary night of november that i beheld the accomplishment
of my toils. with an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, i
collected the instruments of life around me, that i might infuse a
spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. it was
already one in the morning; the rain pattered dismally against the
panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the
half-extinguished light, i saw the dull yellow eye of the creature
open; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion agitated its limbs.

how can i describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate
the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care i had endeavoured to
form? his limbs were in proportion, and i had selected his features as
beautiful. beautiful! great god! his yellow skin scarcely covered
the work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of a lustrous
black, and flowing; his teeth of a pearly whiteness; but these
luxuriances only formed a more horrid contrast with his watery eyes,
that seemed almost of the same colour as the dun-white sockets in which
they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips.

the different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings
of human nature. i had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole
purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body. for this i had
deprived myself of rest and health. i had desired it with an ardour
that far exceeded moderation; but now that i had finished, the beauty
of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my
heart. unable to endure the aspect of the being i had created, i
rushed out of the room and continued a long time traversing my
bed-chamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep. at length lassitude
succeeded to the tumult i had before endured, and i threw myself on the
bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seek a few moments of forgetfulness.
but it was in vain; i slept, indeed, but i was disturbed by the wildest
dreams. i thought i saw elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in
the streets of ingolstadt. delighted and surprised, i embraced her,
but as i imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with
the hue of death; her features appeared to change, and i thought that i
held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her
form, and i saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel.
i started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my
teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and
yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window
shutters, i beheld the wretch—the miserable monster whom i had
created. he held up the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they
may be called, were fixed on me. his jaws opened, and he muttered some
inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks. he might have
spoken, but i did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to
detain me, but i escaped and rushed downstairs. i took refuge in the
courtyard belonging to the house which i inhabited, where i remained
during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the greatest
agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing each sound as if
it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which i
had so miserably given life.

oh! no mortal could support the horror of that countenance. a mummy
again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch. i
had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then, but when those
muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing
such as even dante could not have conceived.

i passed the night wretchedly. sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and
hardly that i felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, i nearly
sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. mingled with
this horror, i felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had
been my food and pleasant rest for so long a space were now become a
hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete!

morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my
sleepless and aching eyes the church of ingolstadt, its white steeple
and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. the porter opened the gates
of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and i issued into
the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if i sought to avoid the
wretch whom i feared every turning of the street would present to my
view. i did not dare return to the apartment which i inhabited, but
felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured
from a black and comfortless sky.

i continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring by
bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. i
traversed the streets without any clear conception of where i was or
what i was doing. my heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and i
hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me:
 
 like one who, on a lonely road,
 doth walk in fear and dread,
 and, having once turned round, walks on,
 and turns no more his head;
 because he knows a frightful fiend
 doth close behind him tread.
 
 [coleridge’s “ancient mariner.”]



continuing thus, i came at length opposite to the inn at which the various
diligences and carriages usually stopped. here i paused, i knew not why;
but i remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming
towards me from the other end of the street. as it drew nearer i observed
that it was the swiss diligence; it stopped just where i was standing, and
on the door being opened, i perceived henry clerval, who, on seeing me,
instantly sprung out. “my dear frankenstein,” exclaimed he,
“how glad i am to see you! how fortunate that you should be here at
the very moment of my alighting!”

nothing could equal my delight on seeing clerval; his presence brought back
to my thoughts my father, elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear
to my recollection. i grasped his hand, and in a moment forgot my horror
and misfortune; i felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months,
calm and serene joy. i welcomed my friend, therefore, in the most cordial
manner, and we walked towards my college. clerval continued talking for
some time about our mutual friends and his own good fortune in being
permitted to come to ingolstadt. “you may easily believe,” said
he, “how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that all
necessary knowledge was not comprised in the noble art of book-keeping;
and, indeed, i believe i left him incredulous to the last, for his constant
answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the dutch
schoolmaster in the vicar of wakefield: ‘i have ten thousand florins
a year without greek, i eat heartily without greek.’ but his
affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has
permitted me to undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of
knowledge.”

“it gives me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me how you left
my father, brothers, and elizabeth.”

“very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear from
you so seldom. by the by, i mean to lecture you a little upon their
account myself. but, my dear frankenstein,” continued he, stopping
short and gazing full in my face, “i did not before remark how very ill
you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for
several nights.”

“you have guessed right; i have lately been so deeply engaged in one
occupation that i have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see;
but i hope, i sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an
end and that i am at length free.”

i trembled excessively; i could not endure to think of, and far less to
allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night. i walked with a
quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. i then reflected, and
the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom i had left in my
apartment might still be there, alive and walking about. i dreaded to
behold this monster, but i feared still more that henry should see him.
entreating him, therefore, to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the
stairs, i darted up towards my own room. my hand was already on the
lock of the door before i recollected myself. i then paused, and a
cold shivering came over me. i threw the door forcibly open, as
children are accustomed to do when they expect a spectre to stand in
waiting for them on the other side; but nothing appeared. i stepped
fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed
from its hideous guest. i could hardly believe that so great a good
fortune could have befallen me, but when i became assured that my enemy
had indeed fled, i clapped my hands for joy and ran down to clerval.

we ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast;
but i was unable to contain myself. it was not joy only that possessed
me; i felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse
beat rapidly. i was unable to remain for a single instant in the same
place; i jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud.
clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival,
but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes
for which he could not account, and my loud, unrestrained, heartless
laughter frightened and astonished him.

“my dear victor,” cried he, “what, for god’s sake,
is the matter? do not laugh in that manner. how ill you are! what is the
cause of all this?”

“do not ask me,” cried i, putting my hands before my eyes, for i
thought i saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can
tell. oh, save me! save me!” i imagined that the monster seized me;
i struggled furiously and fell down in a fit.

poor clerval! what must have been his feelings? a meeting, which he
anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. but i
was not the witness of his grief, for i was lifeless and did not
recover my senses for a long, long time.

this was the commencement of a nervous fever which confined me for
several months. during all that time henry was my only nurse. i
afterwards learned that, knowing my father’s advanced age and unfitness
for so long a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make
elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my
disorder. he knew that i could not have a more kind and attentive
nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he
did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest
action that he could towards them.

but i was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the unbounded and
unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me to life.
the form of the monster on whom i had bestowed existence was for ever
before my eyes, and i raved incessantly concerning him. doubtless my
words surprised henry; he at first believed them to be the wanderings
of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinacity with which i
continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder
indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.

by very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and
grieved my friend, i recovered. i remember the first time i became
capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, i
perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared and that the young
buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window. it was
a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my
convalescence. i felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in
my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a short time i became as
cheerful as before i was attacked by the fatal passion.

“dearest clerval,” exclaimed i, “how kind, how very good
you are to me. this whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you
promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. how shall i ever
repay you? i feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which i
have been the occasion, but you will forgive me.”

“you will repay me entirely if you do not discompose yourself, but get
well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, i
may speak to you on one subject, may i not?”

i trembled. one subject! what could it be? could he allude to an object on
whom i dared not even think?

“compose yourself,” said clerval, who observed my change of
colour, “i will not mention it if it agitates you; but your father
and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from you in your
own handwriting. they hardly know how ill you have been and are uneasy at
your long silence.”

“is that all, my dear henry? how could you suppose that my first
thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom i love and
who are so deserving of my love?”

“if this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad
to see a letter that has been lying here some days for you; it is from
your cousin, i believe.”




chapter 6


clerval then put the following letter into my hands. it was from my
own elizabeth:

“my dearest cousin,

“you have been ill, very ill, and even the constant letters of dear
kind henry are not sufficient to reassure me on your account. you are
forbidden to write—to hold a pen; yet one word from you, dear victor,
is necessary to calm our apprehensions. for a long time i have thought
that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have
restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to ingolstadt. i have
prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so
long a journey, yet how often have i regretted not being able to
perform it myself! i figure to myself that the task of attending on
your sickbed has devolved on some mercenary old nurse, who could never
guess your wishes nor minister to them with the care and affection of
your poor cousin. yet that is over now: clerval writes that indeed
you are getting better. i eagerly hope that you will confirm this
intelligence soon in your own handwriting.

“get well—and return to us. you will find a happy, cheerful home and
friends who love you dearly. your father’s health is vigorous, and he
asks but to see you, but to be assured that you are well; and not a
care will ever cloud his benevolent countenance. how pleased you would
be to remark the improvement of our ernest! he is now sixteen and full
of activity and spirit. he is desirous to be a true swiss and to enter
into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his
elder brother returns to us. my uncle is not pleased with the idea of
a military career in a distant country, but ernest never had your
powers of application. he looks upon study as an odious fetter; his
time is spent in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the
lake. i fear that he will become an idler unless we yield the point
and permit him to enter on the profession which he has selected.

“little alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taken
place since you left us. the blue lake and snow-clad mountains—they
never change; and i think our placid home and our contented hearts are
regulated by the same immutable laws. my trifling occupations take up
my time and amuse me, and i am rewarded for any exertions by seeing
none but happy, kind faces around me. since you left us, but one
change has taken place in our little household. do you remember on
what occasion justine moritz entered our family? probably you do not;
i will relate her history, therefore in a few words. madame moritz,
her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom justine was the
third. this girl had always been the favourite of her father, but
through a strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and
after the death of m. moritz, treated her very ill. my aunt observed
this, and when justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother
to allow her to live at our house. the republican institutions of our
country have produced simpler and happier manners than those which
prevail in the great monarchies that surround it. hence there is less
distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the
lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are
more refined and moral. a servant in geneva does not mean the same
thing as a servant in france and england. justine, thus received in
our family, learned the duties of a servant, a condition which, in our
fortunate country, does not include the idea of ignorance and a
sacrifice of the dignity of a human being.

“justine, you may remember, was a great favourite of yours; and i
recollect you once remarked that if you were in an ill humour, one
glance from justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that
ariosto gives concerning the beauty of angelica—she looked so
frank-hearted and happy. my aunt conceived a great attachment for her,
by which she was induced to give her an education superior to that
which she had at first intended. this benefit was fully repaid;
justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: i do not
mean that she made any professions i never heard one pass her lips, but
you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress.
although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate,
yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. she
thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her
phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her.

“when my dearest aunt died every one was too much occupied in their own
grief to notice poor justine, who had attended her during her illness
with the most anxious affection. poor justine was very ill; but other
trials were reserved for her.

“one by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the
exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. the
conscience of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the
deaths of her favourites was a judgement from heaven to chastise her
partiality. she was a roman catholic; and i believe her confessor
confirmed the idea which she had conceived. accordingly, a few months
after your departure for ingolstadt, justine was called home by her
repentant mother. poor girl! she wept when she quitted our house; she
was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had given softness
and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before been remarkable
for vivacity. nor was her residence at her mother’s house of a nature
to restore her gaiety. the poor woman was very vacillating in her
repentance. she sometimes begged justine to forgive her unkindness,
but much oftener accused her of having caused the deaths of her
brothers and sister. perpetual fretting at length threw madame moritz
into a decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is
now at peace for ever. she died on the first approach of cold weather,
at the beginning of this last winter. justine has just returned to us;
and i assure you i love her tenderly. she is very clever and gentle,
and extremely pretty; as i mentioned before, her mien and her
expression continually remind me of my dear aunt.

“i must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling
william. i wish you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with
sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. when he
smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with
health. he has already had one or two little _wives,_ but louisa biron
is his favourite, a pretty little girl of five years of age.

“now, dear victor, i dare say you wish to be indulged in a little
gossip concerning the good people of geneva. the pretty miss mansfield
has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching
marriage with a young englishman, john melbourne, esq. her ugly
sister, manon, married m. duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. your
favourite schoolfellow, louis manoir, has suffered several misfortunes
since the departure of clerval from geneva. but he has already
recovered his spirits, and is reported to be on the point of marrying a
lively pretty frenchwoman, madame tavernier. she is a widow, and much
older than manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with
everybody.

“i have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety
returns upon me as i conclude. write, dearest victor,—one line—one
word will be a blessing to us. ten thousand thanks to henry for his
kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely
grateful. adieu! my cousin; take care of yourself; and, i entreat
you, write!

“elizabeth lavenza.


“geneva, march 18th, 17—.”



“dear, dear elizabeth!” i exclaimed, when i had read her
letter: “i will write instantly and relieve them from the anxiety
they must feel.” i wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but
my convalescence had commenced, and proceeded regularly. in another
fortnight i was able to leave my chamber.

one of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce clerval to the
several professors of the university. in doing this, i underwent a
kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had
sustained. ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the
beginning of my misfortunes, i had conceived a violent antipathy even
to the name of natural philosophy. when i was otherwise quite restored
to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony
of my nervous symptoms. henry saw this, and had removed all my
apparatus from my view. he had also changed my apartment; for he
perceived that i had acquired a dislike for the room which had
previously been my laboratory. but these cares of clerval were made of
no avail when i visited the professors. m. waldman inflicted torture
when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress i
had made in the sciences. he soon perceived that i disliked the
subject; but not guessing the real cause, he attributed my feelings to
modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement, to the science
itself, with a desire, as i evidently saw, of drawing me out. what
could i do? he meant to please, and he tormented me. i felt as if he
had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instruments which
were to be afterwards used in putting me to a slow and cruel death. i
writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain i felt.
clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the
sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his
total ignorance; and the conversation took a more general turn. i
thanked my friend from my heart, but i did not speak. i saw plainly
that he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my secret from
me; and although i loved him with a mixture of affection and reverence
that knew no bounds, yet i could never persuade myself to confide in
him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which
i feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply.

m. krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of
almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me even
more pain than the benevolent approbation of m. waldman. “d—n
the fellow!” cried he; “why, m. clerval, i assure you he has
outstript us all. ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. a
youngster who, but a few years ago, believed in cornelius agrippa as firmly
as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the university; and if
he is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of countenance.—ay,
ay,” continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering,
“m. frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young man.
young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, m. clerval: i was
myself when young; but that wears out in a very short time.”

m. krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned
the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me.

clerval had never sympathised in my tastes for natural science; and his
literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had occupied me. he
came to the university with the design of making himself complete
master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for
the plan of life he had marked out for himself. resolved to pursue no
inglorious career, he turned his eyes toward the east, as affording
scope for his spirit of enterprise. the persian, arabic, and sanskrit
languages engaged his attention, and i was easily induced to enter on
the same studies. idleness had ever been irksome to me, and now that i
wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former studies, i felt
great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not
only instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalists. i
did not, like him, attempt a critical knowledge of their dialects, for
i did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary
amusement. i read merely to understand their meaning, and they well
repaid my labours. their melancholy is soothing, and their joy
elevating, to a degree i never experienced in studying the authors of
any other country. when you read their writings, life appears to
consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns
of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. how
different from the manly and heroical poetry of greece and rome!

summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to geneva was
fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several
accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed impassable,
and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring. i felt this
delay very bitterly; for i longed to see my native town and my beloved
friends. my return had only been delayed so long, from an
unwillingness to leave clerval in a strange place, before he had become
acquainted with any of its inhabitants. the winter, however, was spent
cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came
its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness.

the month of may had already commenced, and i expected the letter daily
which was to fix the date of my departure, when henry proposed a
pedestrian tour in the environs of ingolstadt, that i might bid a
personal farewell to the country i had so long inhabited. i acceded
with pleasure to this proposition: i was fond of exercise, and clerval
had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature
that i had taken among the scenes of my native country.

we passed a fortnight in these perambulations: my health and spirits
had long been restored, and they gained additional strength from the
salubrious air i breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and
the conversation of my friend. study had before secluded me from the
intercourse of my fellow-creatures, and rendered me unsocial; but
clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; he again taught
me to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces of children.
excellent friend! how sincerely you did love me, and endeavour to
elevate my mind until it was on a level with your own. a selfish
pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and
affection warmed and opened my senses; i became the same happy creature
who, a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care.
when happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most
delightful sensations. a serene sky and verdant fields filled me with
ecstasy. the present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring
bloomed in the hedges, while those of summer were already in bud. i
was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed
upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with an
invincible burden.

henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathised in my feelings: he
exerted himself to amuse me, while he expressed the sensations that filled
his soul. the resources of his mind on this occasion were truly
astonishing: his conversation was full of imagination; and very often, in
imitation of the persian and arabic writers, he invented tales of wonderful
fancy and passion. at other times he repeated my favourite poems, or drew
me out into arguments, which he supported with great ingenuity.

we returned to our college on a sunday afternoon: the peasants were
dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. my own spirits were
high, and i bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity.




chapter 7


on my return, i found the following letter from my father:—

“my dear victor,

“you have probably waited impatiently for a letter to fix the date of
your return to us; and i was at first tempted to write only a few
lines, merely mentioning the day on which i should expect you. but
that would be a cruel kindness, and i dare not do it. what would be
your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to
behold, on the contrary, tears and wretchedness? and how, victor, can
i relate our misfortune? absence cannot have rendered you callous to
our joys and griefs; and how shall i inflict pain on my long absent
son? i wish to prepare you for the woeful news, but i know it is
impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words
which are to convey to you the horrible tidings.

“william is dead!—that sweet child, whose smiles delighted and warmed
my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay! victor, he is murdered!

“i will not attempt to console you; but will simply relate the
circumstances of the transaction.

“last thursday (may 7th), i, my niece, and your two brothers, went to
walk in plainpalais. the evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged
our walk farther than usual. it was already dusk before we thought of
returning; and then we discovered that william and ernest, who had gone
on before, were not to be found. we accordingly rested on a seat until
they should return. presently ernest came, and enquired if we had seen
his brother; he said, that he had been playing with him, that william
had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and
afterwards waited for a long time, but that he did not return.

“this account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him
until night fell, when elizabeth conjectured that he might have
returned to the house. he was not there. we returned again, with
torches; for i could not rest, when i thought that my sweet boy had
lost himself, and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night;
elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish. about five in the morning i
discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before i had seen blooming and
active in health, stretched on the grass livid and motionless; the
print of the murder’s finger was on his neck.

“he was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my
countenance betrayed the secret to elizabeth. she was very earnest to
see the corpse. at first i attempted to prevent her but she persisted,
and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the
victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘o god! i have murdered my
darling child!’

“she fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. when she again
lived, it was only to weep and sigh. she told me, that that same
evening william had teased her to let him wear a very valuable
miniature that she possessed of your mother. this picture is gone, and
was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed. we
have no trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him
are unremitted; but they will not restore my beloved william!

“come, dearest victor; you alone can console elizabeth. she weeps
continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his death;
her words pierce my heart. we are all unhappy; but will not that be an
additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter?
your dear mother! alas, victor! i now say, thank god she did not live
to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!

“come, victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin,
but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of
festering, the wounds of our minds. enter the house of mourning, my
friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not
with hatred for your enemies.

“your affectionate and afflicted father,

“alphonse frankenstein.



“geneva, may 12th, 17—.”



clerval, who had watched my countenance as i read this letter, was
surprised to observe the despair that succeeded the joy i at first
expressed on receiving news from my friends. i threw the letter on the
table, and covered my face with my hands.

“my dear frankenstein,” exclaimed henry, when he perceived me
weep with bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? my dear friend,
what has happened?”

i motioned him to take up the letter, while i walked up and down the
room in the extremest agitation. tears also gushed from the eyes of
clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune.

“i can offer you no consolation, my friend,” said he;
“your disaster is irreparable. what do you intend to do?”

“to go instantly to geneva: come with me, henry, to order the horses.”

during our walk, clerval endeavoured to say a few words of consolation;
he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “poor william!” said he,
“dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! who that had
seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his
untimely loss! to die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! how
much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! poor little
fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but
he is at rest. the pang is over, his sufferings are at an end for ever.
a sod covers his gentle form, and he knows no pain. he can no longer
be a subject for pity; we must reserve that for his miserable
survivors.”

clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words
impressed themselves on my mind and i remembered them afterwards in
solitude. but now, as soon as the horses arrived, i hurried into a
cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend.

my journey was very melancholy. at first i wished to hurry on, for i longed
to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends; but when i
drew near my native town, i slackened my progress. i could hardly sustain
the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind. i passed through
scenes familiar to my youth, but which i had not seen for nearly six years.
how altered every thing might be during that time! one sudden and
desolating change had taken place; but a thousand little circumstances
might have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were
done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive. fear overcame me; i
dared no advance, dreading a thousand nameless evils that made me tremble,
although i was unable to define them.

i remained two days at lausanne, in this painful state of mind. i
contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the
snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. by
degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and i continued my journey
towards geneva.

the road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as i
approached my native town. i discovered more distinctly the black
sides of jura, and the bright summit of mont blanc. i wept like a
child. “dear mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your
wanderer? your summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and
placid. is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?”

i fear, my friend, that i shall render myself tedious by dwelling on
these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative
happiness, and i think of them with pleasure. my country, my beloved
country! who but a native can tell the delight i took in again
beholding thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely
lake!

yet, as i drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. night also
closed around; and when i could hardly see the dark mountains, i felt still
more gloomily. the picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil, and i
foresaw obscurely that i was destined to become the most wretched of human
beings. alas! i prophesied truly, and failed only in one single
circumstance, that in all the misery i imagined and dreaded, i did not
conceive the hundredth part of the anguish i was destined to endure.

it was completely dark when i arrived in the environs of geneva; the gates
of the town were already shut; and i was obliged to pass the night at
secheron, a village at the distance of half a league from the city. the sky
was serene; and, as i was unable to rest, i resolved to visit the spot
where my poor william had been murdered. as i could not pass through the
town, i was obliged to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at plainpalais.
during this short voyage i saw the lightning playing on the summit of mont
blanc in the most beautiful figures. the storm appeared to approach
rapidly, and, on landing, i ascended a low hill, that i might observe its
progress. it advanced; the heavens were clouded, and i soon felt the rain
coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased.

i quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm
increased every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash
over my head. it was echoed from salêve, the juras, and the alps of
savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the
lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant
every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself
from the preceding flash. the storm, as is often the case in
switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens. the
most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over the part of the
lake which lies between the promontory of belrive and the village of
copêt. another storm enlightened jura with faint flashes; and another
darkened and sometimes disclosed the môle, a peaked mountain to the
east of the lake.

while i watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, i wandered on with
a hasty step. this noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; i clasped my
hands, and exclaimed aloud, “william, dear angel! this is thy
funeral, this thy dirge!” as i said these words, i perceived in the
gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me; i stood
fixed, gazing intently: i could not be mistaken. a flash of lightning
illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its
gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs
to humanity, instantly informed me that it was the wretch, the filthy
dæmon, to whom i had given life. what did he there? could he be (i
shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother? no sooner did that
idea cross my imagination, than i became convinced of its truth; my teeth
chattered, and i was forced to lean against a tree for support. the figure
passed me quickly, and i lost it in the gloom. nothing in human shape could
have destroyed the fair child. _he_ was the murderer! i could not
doubt it. the mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the
fact. i thought of pursuing the devil; but it would have been in vain, for
another flash discovered him to me hanging among the rocks of the nearly
perpendicular ascent of mont salêve, a hill that bounds plainpalais on the
south. he soon reached the summit, and disappeared.

i remained motionless. the thunder ceased; but the rain still
continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. i
revolved in my mind the events which i had until now sought to forget:
the whole train of my progress toward the creation; the appearance of
the works of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. two years had
now nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life; and
was this his first crime? alas! i had turned loose into the world a
depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not
murdered my brother?

no one can conceive the anguish i suffered during the remainder of the
night, which i spent, cold and wet, in the open air. but i did not
feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in
scenes of evil and despair. i considered the being whom i had cast
among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes
of horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light
of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced
to destroy all that was dear to me.

day dawned; and i directed my steps towards the town. the gates were
open, and i hastened to my father’s house. my first thought was to
discover what i knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be
made. but i paused when i reflected on the story that i had to tell. a
being whom i myself had formed, and endued with life, had met me at
midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. i
remembered also the nervous fever with which i had been seized just at
the time that i dated my creation, and which would give an air of
delirium to a tale otherwise so utterly improbable. i well knew that
if any other had communicated such a relation to me, i should have
looked upon it as the ravings of insanity. besides, the strange nature
of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if i were so far credited
as to persuade my relatives to commence it. and then of what use would
be pursuit? who could arrest a creature capable of scaling the
overhanging sides of mont salêve? these reflections determined me, and
i resolved to remain silent.

it was about five in the morning when i entered my father’s house. i
told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library
to attend their usual hour of rising.

six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace, and i
stood in the same place where i had last embraced my father before my
departure for ingolstadt. beloved and venerable parent! he still remained
to me. i gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over the
mantel-piece. it was an historical subject, painted at my father’s
desire, and represented caroline beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling
by the coffin of her dead father. her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale;
but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the
sentiment of pity. below this picture was a miniature of william; and my
tears flowed when i looked upon it. while i was thus engaged, ernest
entered: he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me:
“welcome, my dearest victor,” said he. “ah! i wish you
had come three months ago, and then you would have found us all joyous and
delighted. you come to us now to share a misery which nothing can
alleviate; yet your presence will, i hope, revive our father, who seems
sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor
elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—poor
william! he was our darling and our pride!”

tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother’s eyes; a sense of mortal
agony crept over my frame. before, i had only imagined the
wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a new, and
a not less terrible, disaster. i tried to calm ernest; i enquired more
minutely concerning my father, and here i named my cousin.

“she most of all,” said ernest, “requires consolation; she accused
herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her
very wretched. but since the murderer has been discovered—”

“the murderer discovered! good god! how can that be? who could attempt
to pursue him? it is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the
winds, or confine a mountain-stream with a straw. i saw him too; he
was free last night!”

“i do not know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of
wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. no
one would believe it at first; and even now elizabeth will not be
convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. indeed, who would credit
that justine moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family,
could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?”

“justine moritz! poor, poor girl, is she the accused? but it is
wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, ernest?”

“no one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have
almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so
confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, i fear,
leaves no hope for doubt. but she will be tried today, and you will
then hear all.”

he then related that, the morning on which the murder of poor william
had been discovered, justine had been taken ill, and confined to her
bed for several days. during this interval, one of the servants,
happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the
murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which
had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer. the servant
instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without saying a word to
any of the family, went to a magistrate; and, upon their deposition,
justine was apprehended. on being charged with the fact, the poor girl
confirmed the suspicion in a great measure by her extreme confusion of
manner.

this was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and i replied
earnestly, “you are all mistaken; i know the murderer. justine, poor,
good justine, is innocent.”

at that instant my father entered. i saw unhappiness deeply impressed
on his countenance, but he endeavoured to welcome me cheerfully; and,
after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced
some other topic than that of our disaster, had not ernest exclaimed,
“good god, papa! victor says that he knows who was the murderer of
poor william.”

“we do also, unfortunately,” replied my father, “for indeed i had
rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much
depravity and ungratitude in one i valued so highly.”

“my dear father, you are mistaken; justine is innocent.”

“if she is, god forbid that she should suffer as guilty. she is to be
tried today, and i hope, i sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted.”

this speech calmed me. i was firmly convinced in my own mind that
justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder. i
had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be
brought forward strong enough to convict her. my tale was not one to
announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as
madness by the vulgar. did any one indeed exist, except i, the
creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the
existence of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance
which i had let loose upon the world?

we were soon joined by elizabeth. time had altered her since i last
beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of
her childish years. there was the same candour, the same vivacity, but
it was allied to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect.
she welcomed me with the greatest affection. “your arrival, my dear
cousin,” said she, “fills me with hope. you perhaps will find some
means to justify my poor guiltless justine. alas! who is safe, if she
be convicted of crime? i rely on her innocence as certainly as i do
upon my own. our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have not only
lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom i sincerely
love, is to be torn away by even a worse fate. if she is condemned, i
never shall know joy more. but she will not, i am sure she will not;
and then i shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little
william.”

“she is innocent, my elizabeth,” said i, “and that shall
be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance
of her acquittal.”

“how kind and generous you are! every one else believes in her guilt,
and that made me wretched, for i knew that it was impossible: and to
see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me
hopeless and despairing.” she wept.

“dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. if she
is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the
activity with which i shall prevent the slightest shadow of
partiality.”




chapter 8


we passed a few sad hours until eleven o’clock, when the trial was to
commence. my father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend
as witnesses, i accompanied them to the court. during the whole of
this wretched mockery of justice i suffered living torture. it was to
be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would
cause the death of two of my fellow beings: one a smiling babe full of
innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every
aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror.
justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised
to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated in an
ignominious grave, and i the cause! a thousand times rather would i
have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to justine, but i
was absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would have
been considered as the ravings of a madman and would not have
exculpated her who suffered through me.

the appearance of justine was calm. she was dressed in mourning, and
her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her
feelings, exquisitely beautiful. yet she appeared confident in
innocence and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by
thousands, for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have
excited was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the
imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed. she
was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as
her confusion had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she
worked up her mind to an appearance of courage. when she entered the
court she threw her eyes round it and quickly discovered where we were
seated. a tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickly
recovered herself, and a look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest
her utter guiltlessness.

the trial began, and after the advocate against her had stated the
charge, several witnesses were called. several strange facts combined
against her, which might have staggered anyone who had not such proof
of her innocence as i had. she had been out the whole of the night on
which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been
perceived by a market-woman not far from the spot where the body of the
murdered child had been afterwards found. the woman asked her what she
did there, but she looked very strangely and only returned a confused
and unintelligible answer. she returned to the house about eight
o’clock, and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she
replied that she had been looking for the child and demanded earnestly
if anything had been heard concerning him. when shown the body, she
fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. the
picture was then produced which the servant had found in her pocket;
and when elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it was the same
which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round
his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.

justine was called on for her defence. as the trial had proceeded, her
countenance had altered. surprise, horror, and misery were strongly
expressed. sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she was
desired to plead, she collected her powers and spoke in an audible
although variable voice.

“god knows,” she said, “how entirely i am innocent. but i
do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; i rest my innocence
on a plain and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced
against me, and i hope the character i have always borne will incline my
judges to a favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears
doubtful or suspicious.”

she then related that, by the permission of elizabeth, she had passed
the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed at the
house of an aunt at chêne, a village situated at about a league from
geneva. on her return, at about nine o’clock, she met a man who asked
her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost. she was
alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him,
when the gates of geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain
several hours of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being
unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. most
of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that
she slept for a few minutes; some steps disturbed her, and she awoke.
it was dawn, and she quitted her asylum, that she might again endeavour
to find my brother. if she had gone near the spot where his body lay,
it was without her knowledge. that she had been bewildered when
questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed
a sleepless night and the fate of poor william was yet uncertain.
concerning the picture she could give no account.

“i know,” continued the unhappy victim, “how heavily and
fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but i have no power of
explaining it; and when i have expressed my utter ignorance, i am only left
to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been
placed in my pocket. but here also i am checked. i believe that i have no
enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me
wantonly. did the murderer place it there? i know of no opportunity
afforded him for so doing; or, if i had, why should he have stolen the
jewel, to part with it again so soon?

“i commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet i see no room for
hope. i beg permission to have a few witnesses examined concerning my
character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed
guilt, i must be condemned, although i would pledge my salvation on my
innocence.”

several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and
they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they
supposed her guilty rendered them timorous and unwilling to come
forward. elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent
dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused,
when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address
the court.

“i am,” said she, “the cousin of the unhappy child who
was murdered, or rather his sister, for i was educated by and have lived
with his parents ever since and even long before his birth. it may
therefore be judged indecent in me to come forward on this occasion, but
when i see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her
pretended friends, i wish to be allowed to speak, that i may say what i
know of her character. i am well acquainted with the accused. i have lived
in the same house with her, at one time for five and at another for nearly
two years. during all that period she appeared to me the most amiable and
benevolent of human creatures. she nursed madame frankenstein, my aunt, in
her last illness, with the greatest affection and care and afterwards
attended her own mother during a tedious illness, in a manner that excited
the admiration of all who knew her, after which she again lived in my
uncle’s house, where she was beloved by all the family. she was
warmly attached to the child who is now dead and acted towards him like a
most affectionate mother. for my own part, i do not hesitate to say that,
notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, i believe and rely
on her perfect innocence. she had no temptation for such an action; as to
the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnestly desired it,
i should have willingly given it to her, so much do i esteem and value
her.”

a murmur of approbation followed elizabeth’s simple and powerful
appeal, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in
favour of poor justine, on whom the public indignation was turned with
renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude. she
herself wept as elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. my own
agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial. i believed
in her innocence; i knew it. could the dæmon who had (i did not for a
minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have
betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy? i could not sustain the
horror of my situation, and when i perceived that the popular voice and
the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim,
i rushed out of the court in agony. the tortures of the accused did
not equal mine; she was sustained by innocence, but the fangs of
remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.

i passed a night of unmingled wretchedness. in the morning i went to
the court; my lips and throat were parched. i dared not ask the fatal
question, but i was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my
visit. the ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and justine
was condemned.

i cannot pretend to describe what i then felt. i had before
experienced sensations of horror, and i have endeavoured to bestow upon
them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the
heart-sickening despair that i then endured. the person to whom i
addressed myself added that justine had already confessed her guilt.
“that evidence,” he observed, “was hardly required in so glaring a
case, but i am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to
condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so
decisive.”

this was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? had
my eyes deceived me? and was i really as mad as the whole world would
believe me to be if i disclosed the object of my suspicions? i
hastened to return home, and elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.

“my cousin,” replied i, “it is decided as you may have expected; all
judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty
should escape. but she has confessed.”

this was a dire blow to poor elizabeth, who had relied with firmness upon
justine’s innocence. “alas!” said she. “how shall i
ever again believe in human goodness? justine, whom i loved and esteemed as
my sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray?
her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has
committed a murder.”

soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a desire to see my
cousin. my father wished her not to go but said that he left it to her own
judgment and feelings to decide. “yes,” said elizabeth,
“i will go, although she is guilty; and you, victor, shall accompany
me; i cannot go alone.” the idea of this visit was torture to me, yet
i could not refuse.

we entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld justine sitting on some
straw at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested on
her knees. she rose on seeing us enter, and when we were left alone with
her, she threw herself at the feet of elizabeth, weeping bitterly. my
cousin wept also.

“oh, justine!” said she. “why did you rob me of my last consolation?
i relied on your innocence, and although i was then very wretched, i
was not so miserable as i am now.”

“and do you also believe that i am so very, very wicked? do you also
join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn me as a murderer?” her
voice was suffocated with sobs.

“rise, my poor girl,” said elizabeth; “why do you kneel,
if you are innocent? i am not one of your enemies, i believed you
guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until i heard that you had
yourself declared your guilt. that report, you say, is false; and be
assured, dear justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a
moment, but your own confession.”

“i did confess, but i confessed a lie. i confessed, that i might
obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than
all my other sins. the god of heaven forgive me! ever since i was
condemned, my confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced,
until i almost began to think that i was the monster that he said i
was. he threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if
i continued obdurate. dear lady, i had none to support me; all looked
on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. what could i do?
in an evil hour i subscribed to a lie; and now only am i truly
miserable.”

she paused, weeping, and then continued, “i thought with horror, my
sweet lady, that you should believe your justine, whom your blessed
aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable
of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated.
dear william! dearest blessed child! i soon shall see you again in
heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as i
am to suffer ignominy and death.”

“oh, justine! forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you.
why did you confess? but do not mourn, dear girl. do not fear. i
will proclaim, i will prove your innocence. i will melt the stony
hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers. you shall not die!
you, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold!
no! no! i never could survive so horrible a misfortune.”

justine shook her head mournfully. “i do not fear to die,” she said;
“that pang is past. god raises my weakness and gives me courage to
endure the worst. i leave a sad and bitter world; and if you remember
me and think of me as of one unjustly condemned, i am resigned to the
fate awaiting me. learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to
the will of heaven!”

during this conversation i had retired to a corner of the prison room,
where i could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me. despair!
who dared talk of that? the poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass
the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as i did, such
deep and bitter agony. i gnashed my teeth and ground them together,
uttering a groan that came from my inmost soul. justine started. when
she saw who it was, she approached me and said, “dear sir, you are very
kind to visit me; you, i hope, do not believe that i am guilty?”

i could not answer. “no, justine,” said elizabeth; “he is more
convinced of your innocence than i was, for even when he heard that you
had confessed, he did not credit it.”

“i truly thank him. in these last moments i feel the sincerest
gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness. how sweet is
the affection of others to such a wretch as i am! it removes more than
half my misfortune, and i feel as if i could die in peace now that my
innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin.”

thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself. she indeed
gained the resignation she desired. but i, the true murderer, felt the
never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of no hope or
consolation. elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was
the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair
moon, for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. anguish and
despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; i bore a hell within
me which nothing could extinguish. we stayed several hours with
justine, and it was with great difficulty that elizabeth could tear
herself away. “i wish,” cried she, “that i were to die with you; i
cannot live in this world of misery.”

justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty
repressed her bitter tears. she embraced elizabeth and said in a voice
of half-suppressed emotion, “farewell, sweet lady, dearest elizabeth,
my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and
preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever
suffer! live, and be happy, and make others so.”

and on the morrow justine died. elizabeth’s heart-rending eloquence
failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the
criminality of the saintly sufferer. my passionate and indignant
appeals were lost upon them. and when i received their cold answers
and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed
avowal died away on my lips. thus i might proclaim myself a madman,
but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim. she
perished on the scaffold as a murderess!

from the tortures of my own heart, i turned to contemplate the deep and
voiceless grief of my elizabeth. this also was my doing! and my
father’s woe, and the desolation of that late so smiling home all was
the work of my thrice-accursed hands! ye weep, unhappy ones, but these
are not your last tears! again shall you raise the funeral wail, and
the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be heard!
frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, much-loved friend; he
who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who has no
thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear
countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life
in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond
his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction
pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments!

thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair,
i beheld those i loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of william and
justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts.




chapter 9


nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have
been worked up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of
inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope
and fear. justine died, she rested, and i was alive. the blood flowed
freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my
heart which nothing could remove. sleep fled from my eyes; i wandered
like an evil spirit, for i had committed deeds of mischief beyond
description horrible, and more, much more (i persuaded myself) was yet
behind. yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue.
i had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment
when i should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow
beings. now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience
which allowed me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and
from thence to gather promise of new hopes, i was seized by remorse and
the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures
such as no language can describe.

this state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never
entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. i shunned
the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me;
solitude was my only consolation—deep, dark, deathlike solitude.

my father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my disposition
and habits and endeavoured by arguments deduced from the feelings of his
serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with fortitude and
awaken in me the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me.
“do you think, victor,” said he, “that i do not suffer
also? no one could love a child more than i loved your
brother”—tears came into his eyes as he spoke—“but
is it not a duty to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting
their unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief? it is also a duty
owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment,
or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for
society.”

this advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; i
should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if
remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my
other sensations. now i could only answer my father with a look of
despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view.

about this time we retired to our house at belrive. this change was
particularly agreeable to me. the shutting of the gates regularly at
ten o’clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that
hour had rendered our residence within the walls of geneva very irksome
to me. i was now free. often, after the rest of the family had
retired for the night, i took the boat and passed many hours upon the
water. sometimes, with my sails set, i was carried by the wind; and
sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, i left the boat to
pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections. i
was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and i the only
unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and
heavenly—if i except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and
interrupted croaking was heard only when i approached the shore—often,
i say, i was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters
might close over me and my calamities for ever. but i was restrained,
when i thought of the heroic and suffering elizabeth, whom i tenderly
loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine. i thought also of my
father and surviving brother; should i by my base desertion leave them
exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom i had let loose
among them?

at these moments i wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my
mind only that i might afford them consolation and happiness. but that
could not be. remorse extinguished every hope. i had been the author of
unalterable evils, and i lived in daily fear lest the monster whom i had
created should perpetrate some new wickedness. i had an obscure feeling
that all was not over and that he would still commit some signal crime,
which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection of the past.
there was always scope for fear so long as anything i loved remained
behind. my abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. when i thought of
him i gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and i ardently wished to
extinguish that life which i had so thoughtlessly bestowed. when i
reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge burst all bounds
of moderation. i would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the
andes, could i, when there, have precipitated him to their base. i wished
to see him again, that i might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his
head and avenge the deaths of william and justine.

our house was the house of mourning. my father’s health was deeply
shaken by the horror of the recent events. elizabeth was sad and
desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all
pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she
then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted
and destroyed. she was no longer that happy creature who in earlier youth
wandered with me on the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our
future prospects. the first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from
the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest
smiles.

“when i reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “on the miserable death of
justine moritz, i no longer see the world and its works as they before
appeared to me. before, i looked upon the accounts of vice and
injustice that i read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient
days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to
reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men
appear to me as monsters thirsting for each other’s blood. yet i am
certainly unjust. everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and
if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly
she would have been the most depraved of human creatures. for the sake
of a few jewels, to have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend,
a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if
it had been her own! i could not consent to the death of any human
being, but certainly i should have thought such a creature unfit to
remain in the society of men. but she was innocent. i know, i feel
she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms me.
alas! victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can
assure themselves of certain happiness? i feel as if i were walking on
the edge of a precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and
endeavouring to plunge me into the abyss. william and justine were
assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the world free,
and perhaps respected. but even if i were condemned to suffer on the
scaffold for the same crimes, i would not change places with such a
wretch.”

i listened to this discourse with the extremest agony. i, not in deed,
but in effect, was the true murderer. elizabeth read my anguish in my
countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “my dearest friend, you
must calm yourself. these events have affected me, god knows how
deeply; but i am not so wretched as you are. there is an expression of
despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance that makes me
tremble. dear victor, banish these dark passions. remember the
friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you. have we lost
the power of rendering you happy? ah! while we love, while we are
true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native
country, we may reap every tranquil blessing—what can disturb our
peace?”

and could not such words from her whom i fondly prized before every
other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my
heart? even as she spoke i drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at
that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of her.

thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of
heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the very accents of love were
ineffectual. i was encompassed by a cloud which no beneficial
influence could penetrate. the wounded deer dragging its fainting
limbs to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had
pierced it, and to die, was but a type of me.

sometimes i could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but
sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily
exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable
sensations. it was during an access of this kind that i suddenly left
my home, and bending my steps towards the near alpine valleys, sought
in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and
my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. my wanderings were directed
towards the valley of chamounix. i had visited it frequently during my
boyhood. six years had passed since then: _i_ was a wreck, but nought
had changed in those savage and enduring scenes.

i performed the first part of my journey on horseback. i afterwards
hired a mule, as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive
injury on these rugged roads. the weather was fine; it was about the
middle of the month of august, nearly two months after the death of
justine, that miserable epoch from which i dated all my woe. the
weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as i plunged yet deeper in
the ravine of arve. the immense mountains and precipices that overhung
me on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and
the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as
omnipotence—and i ceased to fear or to bend before any being less
almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements, here
displayed in their most terrific guise. still, as i ascended higher,
the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character.
ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains, the
impetuous arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from
among the trees formed a scene of singular beauty. but it was
augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty alps, whose white and
shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another
earth, the habitations of another race of beings.

i passed the bridge of pélissier, where the ravine, which the river
forms, opened before me, and i began to ascend the mountain that
overhangs it. soon after, i entered the valley of chamounix. this
valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and
picturesque as that of servox, through which i had just passed. the
high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but i saw no
more ruined castles and fertile fields. immense glaciers approached
the road; i heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche and
marked the smoke of its passage. mont blanc, the supreme and
magnificent mont blanc, raised itself from the surrounding _aiguilles_,
and its tremendous _dôme_ overlooked the valley.

a tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this
journey. some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and
recognised, reminded me of days gone by, and were associated with the
lighthearted gaiety of boyhood. the very winds whispered in soothing
accents, and maternal nature bade me weep no more. then again the
kindly influence ceased to act—i found myself fettered again to grief
and indulging in all the misery of reflection. then i spurred on my
animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all,
myself—or, in a more desperate fashion, i alighted and threw myself on
the grass, weighed down by horror and despair.

at length i arrived at the village of chamounix. exhaustion succeeded
to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which i had endured.
for a short space of time i remained at the window watching the pallid
lightnings that played above mont blanc and listening to the rushing of
the arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath. the same lulling sounds
acted as a lullaby to my too keen sensations; when i placed my head
upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; i felt it as it came and blessed
the giver of oblivion.




chapter 10


i spent the following day roaming through the valley. i stood beside
the sources of the arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that
with slow pace is advancing down from the summit of the hills to
barricade the valley. the abrupt sides of vast mountains were before
me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; a few shattered pines were
scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious
presence-chamber of imperial nature was broken only by the brawling
waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the
avalanche or the cracking, reverberated along the mountains, of the
accumulated ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws,
was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a plaything in
their hands. these sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the
greatest consolation that i was capable of receiving. they elevated me
from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my
grief, they subdued and tranquillised it. in some degree, also, they
diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the
last month. i retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were,
waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which i
had contemplated during the day. they congregated round me; the
unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods,
and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds—they all
gathered round me and bade me be at peace.

where had they fled when the next morning i awoke? all of
soul-inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every
thought. the rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists hid the
summits of the mountains, so that i even saw not the faces of those
mighty friends. still i would penetrate their misty veil and seek them
in their cloudy retreats. what were rain and storm to me? my mule was
brought to the door, and i resolved to ascend to the summit of
montanvert. i remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous
and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when i first saw it.
it had then filled me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the
soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy.
the sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the
effect of solemnising my mind and causing me to forget the passing
cares of life. i determined to go without a guide, for i was well
acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the
solitary grandeur of the scene.

the ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short
windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the
mountain. it is a scene terrifically desolate. in a thousand spots
the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie
broken and strewed on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent,
leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely upon
other trees. the path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines
of snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is
particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking
in a loud voice, produces a concussion of air sufficient to draw
destruction upon the head of the speaker. the pines are not tall or
luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the scene.
i looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers
which ran through it and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite
mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain
poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression i
received from the objects around me. alas! why does man boast of
sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders
them more necessary beings. if our impulses were confined to hunger,
thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by
every wind that blows and a chance word or scene that that word may
convey to us.

  we rest; a dream has power to poison sleep.
     we rise; one wand’ring thought pollutes the day.
  we feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep,
     embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away;
  it is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow,
     the path of its departure still is free.
  man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow;
     nought may endure but mutability!


it was nearly noon when i arrived at the top of the ascent. for some
time i sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. a mist covered
both that and the surrounding mountains. presently a breeze dissipated
the cloud, and i descended upon the glacier. the surface is very
uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and
interspersed by rifts that sink deep. the field of ice is almost a
league in width, but i spent nearly two hours in crossing it. the
opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. from the side where i
now stood montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of a league;
and above it rose mont blanc, in awful majesty. i remained in a recess
of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene. the sea,
or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains,
whose aerial summits hung over its recesses. their icy and glittering
peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds. my heart, which was
before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; i exclaimed,
“wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow
beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion,
away from the joys of life.”

as i said this i suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some distance,
advancing towards me with superhuman speed. he bounded over the
crevices in the ice, among which i had walked with caution; his
stature, also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of man. i was
troubled; a mist came over my eyes, and i felt a faintness seize me,
but i was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains. i
perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!)
that it was the wretch whom i had created. i trembled with rage and
horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him in
mortal combat. he approached; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish,
combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness
rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. but i scarcely
observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance,
and i recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious
detestation and contempt.

“devil,” i exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? and do
not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head?
begone, vile insect! or rather, stay, that i may trample you to dust! and,
oh! that i could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore
those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!”

“i expected this reception,” said the dæmon. “all men hate the
wretched; how, then, must i be hated, who am miserable beyond all
living things! yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature,
to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of
one of us. you purpose to kill me. how dare you sport thus with life?
do your duty towards me, and i will do mine towards you and the rest of
mankind. if you will comply with my conditions, i will leave them and
you at peace; but if you refuse, i will glut the maw of death, until it
be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends.”

“abhorred monster! fiend that thou art! the tortures of hell are too
mild a vengeance for thy crimes. wretched devil! you reproach me with
your creation, come on, then, that i may extinguish the spark which i
so negligently bestowed.”

my rage was without bounds; i sprang on him, impelled by all the
feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.

he easily eluded me and said,

“be calm! i entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred
on my devoted head. have i not suffered enough, that you seek to
increase my misery? life, although it may only be an accumulation of
anguish, is dear to me, and i will defend it. remember, thou hast made
me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my
joints more supple. but i will not be tempted to set myself in
opposition to thee. i am thy creature, and i will be even mild and
docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also perform thy part,
the which thou owest me. oh, frankenstein, be not equitable to every
other and trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy
clemency and affection, is most due. remember that i am thy creature;
i ought to be thy adam, but i am rather the fallen angel, whom thou
drivest from joy for no misdeed. everywhere i see bliss, from which i
alone am irrevocably excluded. i was benevolent and good; misery made
me a fiend. make me happy, and i shall again be virtuous.”

“begone! i will not hear you. there can be no community between you
and me; we are enemies. begone, or let us try our strength in a fight,
in which one must fall.”

“how can i move thee? will no entreaties cause thee to turn a
favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and
compassion? believe me, frankenstein, i was benevolent; my soul glowed
with love and humanity; but am i not alone, miserably alone? you, my
creator, abhor me; what hope can i gather from your fellow creatures,
who owe me nothing? they spurn and hate me. the desert mountains and
dreary glaciers are my refuge. i have wandered here many days; the
caves of ice, which i only do not fear, are a dwelling to me, and the
only one which man does not grudge. these bleak skies i hail, for they
are kinder to me than your fellow beings. if the multitude of mankind
knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for
my destruction. shall i not then hate them who abhor me? i will keep
no terms with my enemies. i am miserable, and they shall share my
wretchedness. yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver
them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that
not only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be
swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage. let your compassion be
moved, and do not disdain me. listen to my tale; when you have heard
that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that i deserve.
but hear me. the guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they
are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. listen
to me, frankenstein. you accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with
a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. oh, praise the
eternal justice of man! yet i ask you not to spare me; listen to me,
and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.”

“why do you call to my remembrance,” i rejoined, “circumstances of
which i shudder to reflect, that i have been the miserable origin and
author? cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw
light! cursed (although i curse myself) be the hands that formed you!
you have made me wretched beyond expression. you have left me no power
to consider whether i am just to you or not. begone! relieve me from
the sight of your detested form.”

“thus i relieve thee, my creator,” he said, and placed his hated hands
before my eyes, which i flung from me with violence; “thus i take from
thee a sight which you abhor. still thou canst listen to me and grant
me thy compassion. by the virtues that i once possessed, i demand this
from you. hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of
this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon
the mountain. the sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends
to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another
world, you will have heard my story and can decide. on you it rests,
whether i quit for ever the neighbourhood of man and lead a harmless
life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of
your own speedy ruin.”

as he said this he led the way across the ice; i followed. my heart
was full, and i did not answer him, but as i proceeded, i weighed the
various arguments that he had used and determined at least to listen to
his tale. i was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my
resolution. i had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my
brother, and i eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion.
for the first time, also, i felt what the duties of a creator towards
his creature were, and that i ought to render him happy before i
complained of his wickedness. these motives urged me to comply with
his demand. we crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite
rock. the air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we
entered the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, i with a heavy
heart and depressed spirits. but i consented to listen, and seating
myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began
his tale.




chapter 11


“it is with considerable difficulty that i remember the original era of
my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct.
a strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and i saw, felt, heard,
and smelt at the same time; and it was, indeed, a long time before i
learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses. by
degrees, i remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that i
was obliged to shut my eyes. darkness then came over me and troubled
me, but hardly had i felt this when, by opening my eyes, as i now
suppose, the light poured in upon me again. i walked and, i believe,
descended, but i presently found a great alteration in my sensations.
before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my
touch or sight; but i now found that i could wander on at liberty, with
no obstacles which i could not either surmount or avoid. the light
became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat wearying me as i
walked, i sought a place where i could receive shade. this was the
forest near ingolstadt; and here i lay by the side of a brook resting
from my fatigue, until i felt tormented by hunger and thirst. this
roused me from my nearly dormant state, and i ate some berries which i
found hanging on the trees or lying on the ground. i slaked my thirst
at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep.

“it was dark when i awoke; i felt cold also, and half frightened, as it
were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. before i had quitted
your apartment, on a sensation of cold, i had covered myself with some
clothes, but these were insufficient to secure me from the dews of
night. i was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; i knew, and could
distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, i sat
down and wept.

“soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave me a sensation of
pleasure. i started up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the
trees. [the moon] i gazed with a kind of wonder. it moved slowly,
but it enlightened my path, and i again went out in search of berries.
i was still cold when under one of the trees i found a huge cloak, with
which i covered myself, and sat down upon the ground. no distinct
ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. i felt light, and hunger,
and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears, and on
all sides various scents saluted me; the only object that i could
distinguish was the bright moon, and i fixed my eyes on that with
pleasure.

“several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had
greatly lessened, when i began to distinguish my sensations from each
other. i gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied me with
drink and the trees that shaded me with their foliage. i was delighted
when i first discovered that a pleasant sound, which often saluted my
ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals who had
often intercepted the light from my eyes. i began also to observe,
with greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded me and to perceive the
boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me. sometimes i
tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable.
sometimes i wished to express my sensations in my own mode, but the
uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into
silence again.

“the moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with a lessened
form, showed itself, while i still remained in the forest. my
sensations had by this time become distinct, and my mind received every
day additional ideas. my eyes became accustomed to the light and to
perceive objects in their right forms; i distinguished the insect from
the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. i found that the
sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and
thrush were sweet and enticing.

“one day, when i was oppressed by cold, i found a fire which had been
left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the
warmth i experienced from it. in my joy i thrust my hand into the live
embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain. how strange,
i thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! i
examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it to be
composed of wood. i quickly collected some branches, but they were wet
and would not burn. i was pained at this and sat still watching the
operation of the fire. the wet wood which i had placed near the heat
dried and itself became inflamed. i reflected on this, and by touching
the various branches, i discovered the cause and busied myself in
collecting a great quantity of wood, that i might dry it and have a
plentiful supply of fire. when night came on and brought sleep with
it, i was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. i
covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches
upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, i lay on the ground and sank
into sleep.

“it was morning when i awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire.
i uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a flame. i
observed this also and contrived a fan of branches, which roused the
embers when they were nearly extinguished. when night came again i
found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that
the discovery of this element was useful to me in my food, for i found
some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and
tasted much more savoury than the berries i gathered from the trees. i
tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on
the live embers. i found that the berries were spoiled by this
operation, and the nuts and roots much improved.

“food, however, became scarce, and i often spent the whole day
searching in vain for a few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger. when
i found this, i resolved to quit the place that i had hitherto
inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants i experienced would be
more easily satisfied. in this emigration i exceedingly lamented the
loss of the fire which i had obtained through accident and knew not how
to reproduce it. i gave several hours to the serious consideration of
this difficulty, but i was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply
it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, i struck across the wood
towards the setting sun. i passed three days in these rambles and at
length discovered the open country. a great fall of snow had taken
place the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the
appearance was disconsolate, and i found my feet chilled by the cold
damp substance that covered the ground.

“it was about seven in the morning, and i longed to obtain food and
shelter; at length i perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which
had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. this
was a new sight to me, and i examined the structure with great
curiosity. finding the door open, i entered. an old man sat in it,
near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast. he turned on
hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the
hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form
hardly appeared capable. his appearance, different from any i had ever
before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me. but i was enchanted
by the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not
penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite
and divine a retreat as pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell
after their sufferings in the lake of fire. i greedily devoured the
remnants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese,
milk, and wine; the latter, however, i did not like. then, overcome by
fatigue, i lay down among some straw and fell asleep.

“it was noon when i awoke, and allured by the warmth of the sun, which
shone brightly on the white ground, i determined to recommence my
travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a
wallet i found, i proceeded across the fields for several hours, until
at sunset i arrived at a village. how miraculous did this appear! the
huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses engaged my admiration by
turns. the vegetables in the gardens, the milk and cheese that i saw
placed at the windows of some of the cottages, allured my appetite. one
of the best of these i entered, but i had hardly placed my foot within
the door before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted.
the whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until,
grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, i
escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel,
quite bare, and making a wretched appearance after the palaces i had
beheld in the village. this hovel however, joined a cottage of a neat
and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience, i
dared not enter it. my place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so
low that i could with difficulty sit upright in it. no wood, however,
was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and
although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, i found it an
agreeable asylum from the snow and rain.

“here, then, i retreated and lay down happy to have found a shelter,
however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and still more
from the barbarity of man. as soon as morning dawned i crept from my
kennel, that i might view the adjacent cottage and discover if i could
remain in the habitation i had found. it was situated against the back
of the cottage and surrounded on the sides which were exposed by a pig
sty and a clear pool of water. one part was open, and by that i had
crept in; but now i covered every crevice by which i might be perceived
with stones and wood, yet in such a manner that i might move them on
occasion to pass out; all the light i enjoyed came through the sty, and
that was sufficient for me.

“having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, i
retired, for i saw the figure of a man at a distance, and i remembered
too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power. i
had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by a loaf
of coarse bread, which i purloined, and a cup with which i could drink
more conveniently than from my hand of the pure water which flowed by
my retreat. the floor was a little raised, so that it was kept
perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was
tolerably warm.

“being thus provided, i resolved to reside in this hovel until
something should occur which might alter my determination. it was
indeed a paradise compared to the bleak forest, my former residence,
the rain-dropping branches, and dank earth. i ate my breakfast with
pleasure and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little
water when i heard a step, and looking through a small chink, i beheld
a young creature, with a pail on her head, passing before my hovel. the
girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what i have since found
cottagers and farmhouse servants to be. yet she was meanly dressed, a
coarse blue petticoat and a linen jacket being her only garb; her fair
hair was plaited but not adorned: she looked patient yet sad. i lost
sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour she returned bearing
the pail, which was now partly filled with milk. as she walked along,
seemingly incommoded by the burden, a young man met her, whose
countenance expressed a deeper despondence. uttering a few sounds with
an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head and bore it to the
cottage himself. she followed, and they disappeared. presently i saw
the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field
behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the
house and sometimes in the yard.

“on examining my dwelling, i found that one of the windows of the
cottage had formerly occupied a part of it, but the panes had been
filled up with wood. in one of these was a small and almost
imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate.
through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean
but very bare of furniture. in one corner, near a small fire, sat an
old man, leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. the
young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she
took something out of a drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat
down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play
and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the
nightingale. it was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had
never beheld aught beautiful before. the silver hair and benevolent
countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle
manners of the girl enticed my love. he played a sweet mournful air
which i perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion, of
which the old man took no notice, until she sobbed audibly; he then
pronounced a few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt
at his feet. he raised her and smiled with such kindness and affection
that i felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were
a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as i had never before experienced,
either from hunger or cold, warmth or food; and i withdrew from the
window, unable to bear these emotions.

“soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a
load of wood. the girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of
his burden, and taking some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on
the fire; then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage,
and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese. she seemed
pleased and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she
placed in water, and then upon the fire. she afterwards continued her
work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appeared busily
employed in digging and pulling up roots. after he had been employed
thus about an hour, the young woman joined him and they entered the
cottage together.

“the old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance
of his companions he assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to
eat. the meal was quickly dispatched. the young woman was again
occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man walked before the
cottage in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth.
nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent
creatures. one was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming
with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his
figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his
eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. the
old man returned to the cottage, and the youth, with tools different
from those he had used in the morning, directed his steps across the
fields.

“night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, i found that the
cottagers had a means of prolonging light by the use of tapers, and was
delighted to find that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the
pleasure i experienced in watching my human neighbours. in the evening
the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations
which i did not understand; and the old man again took up the
instrument which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted me in
the morning. so soon as he had finished, the youth began, not to play,
but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and neither resembling the
harmony of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; i since
found that he read aloud, but at that time i knew nothing of the
science of words or letters.

“the family, after having been thus occupied for a short time,
extinguished their lights and retired, as i conjectured, to rest.”




chapter 12


“i lay on my straw, but i could not sleep. i thought of the
occurrences of the day. what chiefly struck me was the gentle manners
of these people, and i longed to join them, but dared not. i
remembered too well the treatment i had suffered the night before from
the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct i
might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present i would
remain quietly in my hovel, watching and endeavouring to discover the
motives which influenced their actions.

“the cottagers arose the next morning before the sun. the young woman
arranged the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed
after the first meal.

“this day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it.
the young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in
various laborious occupations within. the old man, whom i soon
perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or
in contemplation. nothing could exceed the love and respect which the
younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion. they
performed towards him every little office of affection and duty with
gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles.

“they were not entirely happy. the young man and his companion often
went apart and appeared to weep. i saw no cause for their unhappiness,
but i was deeply affected by it. if such lovely creatures were
miserable, it was less strange that i, an imperfect and solitary being,
should be wretched. yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? they
possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every
luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands
when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more,
they enjoyed one another’s company and speech, interchanging each day
looks of affection and kindness. what did their tears imply? did they
really express pain? i was at first unable to solve these questions,
but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which
were at first enigmatic.

“a considerable period elapsed before i discovered one of the causes of
the uneasiness of this amiable family: it was poverty, and they
suffered that evil in a very distressing degree. their nourishment
consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of
one cow, which gave very little during the winter, when its masters
could scarcely procure food to support it. they often, i believe,
suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two
younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old
man when they reserved none for themselves.

“this trait of kindness moved me sensibly. i had been accustomed,
during the night, to steal a part of their store for my own
consumption, but when i found that in doing this i inflicted pain on
the cottagers, i abstained and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and
roots which i gathered from a neighbouring wood.

“i discovered also another means through which i was enabled to assist
their labours. i found that the youth spent a great part of each day
in collecting wood for the family fire, and during the night i often
took his tools, the use of which i quickly discovered, and brought home
firing sufficient for the consumption of several days.

“i remember, the first time that i did this, the young woman, when she
opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing a great
pile of wood on the outside. she uttered some words in a loud voice, and the
youth joined her, who also expressed surprise. i observed, with pleasure,
that he did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the
cottage and cultivating the garden.

“by degrees i made a discovery of still greater moment. i found that
these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and
feelings to one another by articulate sounds. i perceived that the words
they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the
minds and countenances of the hearers. this was indeed a godlike science,
and i ardently desired to become acquainted with it. but i was baffled in
every attempt i made for this purpose. their pronunciation was quick, and
the words they uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible
objects, i was unable to discover any clue by which i could unravel the
mystery of their reference. by great application, however, and after having
remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon in my hovel, i
discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar objects of
discourse; i learned and applied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and
_wood._ i learned also the names of the cottagers themselves. the youth
and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man had only
one, which was _father._ the girl was called _sister_ or
_agatha,_ and the youth _felix, brother,_ or _son_. i cannot
describe the delight i felt when i learned the ideas appropriated to each of
these sounds and was able to pronounce them. i distinguished several other
words without being able as yet to understand or apply them, such as _good,
dearest, unhappy._

“i spent the winter in this manner. the gentle manners and beauty of
the cottagers greatly endeared them to me; when they were unhappy, i
felt depressed; when they rejoiced, i sympathised in their joys. i saw
few human beings besides them, and if any other happened to enter the
cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to me the
superior accomplishments of my friends. the old man, i could perceive,
often endeavoured to encourage his children, as sometimes i found that
he called them, to cast off their melancholy. he would talk in a
cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure
even upon me. agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled
with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but i
generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after
having listened to the exhortations of her father. it was not thus
with felix. he was always the saddest of the group, and even to my
unpractised senses, he appeared to have suffered more deeply than his
friends. but if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more
cheerful than that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old
man.

“i could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked
the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. in the midst of poverty
and want, felix carried with pleasure to his sister the first little
white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. early in
the morning, before she had risen, he cleared away the snow that
obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and
brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual
astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible
hand. in the day, i believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring
farmer, because he often went forth and did not return until dinner,
yet brought no wood with him. at other times he worked in the garden,
but as there was little to do in the frosty season, he read to the old
man and agatha.

“this reading had puzzled me extremely at first, but by degrees i
discovered that he uttered many of the same sounds when he read as when
he talked. i conjectured, therefore, that he found on the paper signs
for speech which he understood, and i ardently longed to comprehend
these also; but how was that possible when i did not even understand
the sounds for which they stood as signs? i improved, however,
sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of
conversation, although i applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for i
easily perceived that, although i eagerly longed to discover myself to
the cottagers, i ought not to make the attempt until i had first become
master of their language, which knowledge might enable me to make them
overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast
perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted.

“i had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers—their grace, beauty,
and delicate complexions; but how was i terrified when i viewed myself
in a transparent pool! at first i started back, unable to believe that
it was indeed i who was reflected in the mirror; and when i became
fully convinced that i was in reality the monster that i am, i was
filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification.
alas! i did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable
deformity.

“as the sun became warmer and the light of day longer, the snow
vanished, and i beheld the bare trees and the black earth. from this
time felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of
impending famine disappeared. their food, as i afterwards found, was
coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it.
several new kinds of plants sprang up in the garden, which they
dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season
advanced.

“the old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did
not rain, as i found it was called when the heavens poured forth its
waters. this frequently took place, but a high wind quickly dried the
earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been.

“my mode of life in my hovel was uniform. during the morning i
attended the motions of the cottagers, and when they were dispersed in
various occupations, i slept; the remainder of the day was spent in
observing my friends. when they had retired to rest, if there was any
moon or the night was star-light, i went into the woods and collected
my own food and fuel for the cottage. when i returned, as often as it
was necessary, i cleared their path from the snow and performed those
offices that i had seen done by felix. i afterwards found that these
labours, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and
once or twice i heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good
spirit, wonderful_; but i did not then understand the signification
of these terms.

“my thoughts now became more active, and i longed to discover the
motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; i was inquisitive to
know why felix appeared so miserable and agatha so sad. i thought
(foolish wretch!) that it might be in my power to restore happiness to
these deserving people. when i slept or was absent, the forms of the
venerable blind father, the gentle agatha, and the excellent felix
flitted before me. i looked upon them as superior beings who would be
the arbiters of my future destiny. i formed in my imagination a
thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and their reception of
me. i imagined that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle
demeanour and conciliating words, i should first win their favour and
afterwards their love.

“these thoughts exhilarated me and led me to apply with fresh ardour to
the acquiring the art of language. my organs were indeed harsh, but
supple; and although my voice was very unlike the soft music of their
tones, yet i pronounced such words as i understood with tolerable ease.
it was as the ass and the lap-dog; yet surely the gentle ass whose
intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved
better treatment than blows and execration.

“the pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the
aspect of the earth. men who before this change seemed to have been
hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in various arts of
cultivation. the birds sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves
began to bud forth on the trees. happy, happy earth! fit habitation
for gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak, damp, and
unwholesome. my spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of
nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil,
and the future gilded by bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy.”




chapter 13


“i now hasten to the more moving part of my story. i shall relate
events that impressed me with feelings which, from what i had been,
have made me what i am.

“spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the skies
cloudless. it surprised me that what before was desert and gloomy
should now bloom with the most beautiful flowers and verdure. my
senses were gratified and refreshed by a thousand scents of delight and
a thousand sights of beauty.

“it was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested
from labour—the old man played on his guitar, and the children
listened to him—that i observed the countenance of felix was
melancholy beyond expression; he sighed frequently, and once his father
paused in his music, and i conjectured by his manner that he inquired
the cause of his son’s sorrow. felix replied in a cheerful accent, and
the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door.

“it was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a country-man as a guide.
the lady was dressed in a dark suit and covered with a thick black
veil. agatha asked a question, to which the stranger only replied by
pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of felix. her voice was
musical but unlike that of either of my friends. on hearing this word,
felix came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw up her
veil, and i beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression. her
hair of a shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were
dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular
proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with
a lovely pink.

“felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw her, every trait of
sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly expressed a degree of
ecstatic joy, of which i could hardly have believed it capable; his
eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment i
thought him as beautiful as the stranger. she appeared affected by
different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held
out her hand to felix, who kissed it rapturously and called her, as
well as i could distinguish, his sweet arabian. she did not appear to
understand him, but smiled. he assisted her to dismount, and
dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. some
conversation took place between him and his father, and the young
stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have kissed his hand,
but he raised her and embraced her affectionately.

“i soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds
and appeared to have a language of her own, she was neither understood
by nor herself understood the cottagers. they made many signs which i
did not comprehend, but i saw that her presence diffused gladness
through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the
morning mists. felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of
delight welcomed his arabian. agatha, the ever-gentle agatha, kissed
the hands of the lovely stranger, and pointing to her brother, made
signs which appeared to me to mean that he had been sorrowful until she
came. some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances,
expressed joy, the cause of which i did not comprehend. presently i
found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger
repeated after them, that she was endeavouring to learn their language;
and the idea instantly occurred to me that i should make use of the
same instructions to the same end. the stranger learned about twenty
words at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which i had
before understood, but i profited by the others.

“as night came on, agatha and the arabian retired early. when they
separated felix kissed the hand of the stranger and said, ‘good night
sweet safie.’ he sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and
by the frequent repetition of her name i conjectured that their lovely
guest was the subject of their conversation. i ardently desired to
understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found
it utterly impossible.

“the next morning felix went out to his work, and after the usual
occupations of agatha were finished, the arabian sat at the feet of the
old man, and taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly
beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my
eyes. she sang, and her voice flowed in a rich cadence, swelling or
dying away like a nightingale of the woods.

“when she had finished, she gave the guitar to agatha, who at first
declined it. she played a simple air, and her voice accompanied it in
sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger. the old
man appeared enraptured and said some words which agatha endeavoured to
explain to safie, and by which he appeared to wish to express that she
bestowed on him the greatest delight by her music.

“the days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole alteration
that joy had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends.
safie was always gay and happy; she and i improved rapidly in the
knowledge of language, so that in two months i began to comprehend most
of the words uttered by my protectors.

“in the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and
the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the
scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods;
the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal
rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably
shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun, for i never
ventured abroad during daylight, fearful of meeting with the same
treatment i had formerly endured in the first village which i entered.

“my days were spent in close attention, that i might more speedily
master the language; and i may boast that i improved more rapidly than
the arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken
accents, whilst i comprehended and could imitate almost every word that
was spoken.

“while i improved in speech, i also learned the science of letters as
it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before me a wide field
for wonder and delight.

“the book from which felix instructed safie was volney’s _ruins
of empires_. i should not have understood the purport of this book had not
felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations. he had chosen this
work, he said, because the declamatory style was framed in imitation of the
eastern authors. through this work i obtained a cursory knowledge of history
and a view of the several empires at present existing in the world; it gave
me an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different
nations of the earth. i heard of the slothful asiatics, of the stupendous
genius and mental activity of the grecians, of the wars and wonderful virtue
of the early romans—of their subsequent degenerating—of the
decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, christianity, and kings. i heard
of the discovery of the american hemisphere and wept with safie over the
hapless fate of its original inhabitants.

“these wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings. was
man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so
vicious and base? he appeared at one time a mere scion of the evil
principle and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and
godlike. to be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour
that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on
record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more
abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. for a long time i
could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or
even why there were laws and governments; but when i heard details of
vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and i turned away with disgust and
loathing.

“every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me.
while i listened to the instructions which felix bestowed upon the
arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. i
heard of the division of property, of immense wealth and squalid
poverty, of rank, descent, and noble blood.

“the words induced me to turn towards myself. i learned that the
possessions most esteemed by your fellow creatures were high and
unsullied descent united with riches. a man might be respected with
only one of these advantages, but without either he was considered,
except in very rare instances, as a vagabond and a slave, doomed to
waste his powers for the profits of the chosen few! and what was i? of
my creation and creator i was absolutely ignorant, but i knew that i
possessed no money, no friends, no kind of property. i was, besides,
endued with a figure hideously deformed and loathsome; i was not even
of the same nature as man. i was more agile than they and could
subsist upon coarser diet; i bore the extremes of heat and cold with
less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs. when i looked
around i saw and heard of none like me. was i, then, a monster, a blot
upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned?

“i cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted
upon me; i tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with
knowledge. oh, that i had for ever remained in my native wood, nor
known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat!

“of what a strange nature is knowledge! it clings to the mind when it
has once seized on it like a lichen on the rock. i wished sometimes to
shake off all thought and feeling, but i learned that there was but one
means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was death—a state
which i feared yet did not understand. i admired virtue and good
feelings and loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my
cottagers, but i was shut out from intercourse with them, except
through means which i obtained by stealth, when i was unseen and
unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire i had of
becoming one among my fellows. the gentle words of agatha and the
animated smiles of the charming arabian were not for me. the mild
exhortations of the old man and the lively conversation of the loved
felix were not for me. miserable, unhappy wretch!

“other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply. i heard of the
difference of sexes, and the birth and growth of children, how the
father doted on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the
older child, how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up
in the precious charge, how the mind of youth expanded and gained
knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the various relationships which
bind one human being to another in mutual bonds.

“but where were my friends and relations? no father had watched my
infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or if
they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which i
distinguished nothing. from my earliest remembrance i had been as i
then was in height and proportion. i had never yet seen a being
resembling me or who claimed any intercourse with me. what was i? the
question again recurred, to be answered only with groans.

“i will soon explain to what these feelings tended, but allow me now to
return to the cottagers, whose story excited in me such various
feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated
in additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so i loved, in
an innocent, half-painful self-deceit, to call them).”




chapter 14


“some time elapsed before i learned the history of my friends. it was
one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding
as it did a number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to
one so utterly inexperienced as i was.

“the name of the old man was de lacey. he was descended from a good
family in france, where he had lived for many years in affluence,
respected by his superiors and beloved by his equals. his son was bred
in the service of his country, and agatha had ranked with ladies of the
highest distinction. a few months before my arrival they had lived in
a large and luxurious city called paris, surrounded by friends and
possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or
taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford.

“the father of safie had been the cause of their ruin. he was a
turkish merchant and had inhabited paris for many years, when, for some
reason which i could not learn, he became obnoxious to the government.
he was seized and cast into prison the very day that safie arrived from
constantinople to join him. he was tried and condemned to death. the
injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all paris was indignant;
and it was judged that his religion and wealth rather than the crime
alleged against him had been the cause of his condemnation.

“felix had accidentally been present at the trial; his horror and
indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the decision of the
court. he made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him and then
looked around for the means. after many fruitless attempts to gain
admittance to the prison, he found a strongly grated window in an
unguarded part of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the
unfortunate muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the
execution of the barbarous sentence. felix visited the grate at night
and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his favour. the turk,
amazed and delighted, endeavoured to kindle the zeal of his deliverer
by promises of reward and wealth. felix rejected his offers with
contempt, yet when he saw the lovely safie, who was allowed to visit
her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the
youth could not help owning to his own mind that the captive possessed
a treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard.

“the turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made
on the heart of felix and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in
his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage so soon as he
should be conveyed to a place of safety. felix was too delicate to
accept this offer, yet he looked forward to the probability of the
event as to the consummation of his happiness.

“during the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for
the escape of the merchant, the zeal of felix was warmed by several
letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to
express her thoughts in the language of her lover by the aid of an old
man, a servant of her father who understood french. she thanked him in
the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and
at the same time she gently deplored her own fate.

“i have copies of these letters, for i found means, during my residence
in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters
were often in the hands of felix or agatha. before i depart i will
give them to you; they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present,
as the sun is already far declined, i shall only have time to repeat
the substance of them to you.

“safie related that her mother was a christian arab, seized and made a
slave by the turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of
the father of safie, who married her. the young girl spoke in high and
enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the
bondage to which she was now reduced. she instructed her daughter in
the tenets of her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of
intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female
followers of muhammad. this lady died, but her lessons were indelibly
impressed on the mind of safie, who sickened at the prospect of again
returning to asia and being immured within the walls of a harem,
allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to
the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble
emulation for virtue. the prospect of marrying a christian and
remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a rank in
society was enchanting to her.

“the day for the execution of the turk was fixed, but on the night
previous to it he quitted his prison and before morning was distant
many leagues from paris. felix had procured passports in the name of
his father, sister, and himself. he had previously communicated his
plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under
the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in
an obscure part of paris.

“felix conducted the fugitives through france to lyons and across mont
cenis to leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a favourable
opportunity of passing into some part of the turkish dominions.

“safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his
departure, before which time the turk renewed his promise that she
should be united to his deliverer; and felix remained with them in
expectation of that event; and in the meantime he enjoyed the society
of the arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest
affection. they conversed with one another through the means of an
interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and safie
sang to him the divine airs of her native country.

“the turk allowed this intimacy to take place and encouraged the hopes
of the youthful lovers, while in his heart he had formed far other
plans. he loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a
christian, but he feared the resentment of felix if he should appear
lukewarm, for he knew that he was still in the power of his deliverer
if he should choose to betray him to the italian state which they
inhabited. he revolved a thousand plans by which he should be enabled
to prolong the deceit until it might be no longer necessary, and
secretly to take his daughter with him when he departed. his plans
were facilitated by the news which arrived from paris.

“the government of france were greatly enraged at the escape of their
victim and spared no pains to detect and punish his deliverer. the
plot of felix was quickly discovered, and de lacey and agatha were
thrown into prison. the news reached felix and roused him from his
dream of pleasure. his blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay
in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed the free air and the society of
her whom he loved. this idea was torture to him. he quickly arranged
with the turk that if the latter should find a favourable opportunity
for escape before felix could return to italy, safie should remain as a
boarder at a convent at leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely arabian,
he hastened to paris and delivered himself up to the vengeance of the
law, hoping to free de lacey and agatha by this proceeding.

“he did not succeed. they remained confined for five months before the
trial took place, the result of which deprived them of their fortune
and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country.

“they found a miserable asylum in the cottage in germany, where i
discovered them. felix soon learned that the treacherous turk, for
whom he and his family endured such unheard-of oppression, on
discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin,
became a traitor to good feeling and honour and had quitted italy with
his daughter, insultingly sending felix a pittance of money to aid him,
as he said, in some plan of future maintenance.

“such were the events that preyed on the heart of felix and rendered
him, when i first saw him, the most miserable of his family. he could
have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the meed of his
virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the turk and the loss
of his beloved safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. the
arrival of the arabian now infused new life into his soul.

“when the news reached leghorn that felix was deprived of his wealth
and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think no more of her
lover, but to prepare to return to her native country. the generous
nature of safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to
expostulate with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his
tyrannical mandate.

“a few days after, the turk entered his daughter’s apartment and told
her hastily that he had reason to believe that his residence at leghorn
had been divulged and that he should speedily be delivered up to the
french government; he had consequently hired a vessel to convey him to
constantinople, for which city he should sail in a few hours. he
intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential
servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his
property, which had not yet arrived at leghorn.

“when alone, safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct that it
would become her to pursue in this emergency. a residence in turkey
was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse
to it. by some papers of her father which fell into her hands she
heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where
he then resided. she hesitated some time, but at length she formed her
determination. taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a
sum of money, she quitted italy with an attendant, a native of leghorn,
but who understood the common language of turkey, and departed for
germany.

“she arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage
of de lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. safie nursed her
with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the
arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country
and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world. she fell, however,
into good hands. the italian had mentioned the name of the spot for
which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house in
which they had lived took care that safie should arrive in safety at
the cottage of her lover.”




chapter 15


“such was the history of my beloved cottagers. it impressed me deeply.
i learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire
their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind.

“as yet i looked upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence and
generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire to
become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities
were called forth and displayed. but in giving an account of the
progress of my intellect, i must not omit a circumstance which occurred
in the beginning of the month of august of the same year.

“one night during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood where i
collected my own food and brought home firing for my protectors, i found on
the ground a leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and
some books. i eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my hovel. 
fortunately the books were written in the language, the elements of which i
had acquired at the cottage; they consisted of _paradise lost_, a volume
of _plutarch’s lives_, and the _sorrows of werter_. the
possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; i now continually
studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were
employed in their ordinary occupations.

“i can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. they produced
in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me
to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection. in
the _sorrows of werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting
story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon
what had hitherto been to me obscure subjects that i found in it a
never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. the gentle and
domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and
feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded
well with my experience among my protectors and with the wants which
were for ever alive in my own bosom. but i thought werter himself a
more divine being than i had ever beheld or imagined; his character
contained no pretension, but it sank deep. the disquisitions upon
death and suicide were calculated to fill me with wonder. i did not
pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet i inclined towards
the opinions of the hero, whose extinction i wept, without precisely
understanding it.

“as i read, however, i applied much personally to my own feelings and
condition. i found myself similar yet at the same time strangely
unlike to the beings concerning whom i read and to whose conversation i
was a listener. i sympathised with and partly understood them, but i
was unformed in mind; i was dependent on none and related to none.
‘the path of my departure was free,’ and there was none to lament my
annihilation. my person was hideous and my stature gigantic. what did
this mean? who was i? what was i? whence did i come? what was my
destination? these questions continually recurred, but i was unable to
solve them.

“the volume of _plutarch’s lives_ which i possessed contained the
histories of the first founders of the ancient republics. this book
had a far different effect upon me from the _sorrows of werter_. i
learned from werter’s imaginations despondency and gloom, but plutarch
taught me high thoughts; he elevated me above the wretched sphere of my
own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages. many
things i read surpassed my understanding and experience. i had a very
confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers,
and boundless seas. but i was perfectly unacquainted with towns and
large assemblages of men. the cottage of my protectors had been the
only school in which i had studied human nature, but this book
developed new and mightier scenes of action. i read of men concerned
in public affairs, governing or massacring their species. i felt the
greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as
far as i understood the signification of those terms, relative as they
were, as i applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. induced by these
feelings, i was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, numa,
solon, and lycurgus, in preference to romulus and theseus. the
patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a
firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had
been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, i should
have been imbued with different sensations.

“but _paradise lost_ excited different and far deeper emotions. i read
it, as i had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as
a true history. it moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the
picture of an omnipotent god warring with his creatures was capable of
exciting. i often referred the several situations, as their similarity
struck me, to my own. like adam, i was apparently united by no link to
any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine
in every other respect. he had come forth from the hands of god a
perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of
his creator; he was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from
beings of a superior nature, but i was wretched, helpless, and alone.
many times i considered satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for
often, like him, when i viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter
gall of envy rose within me.

“another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. soon
after my arrival in the hovel i discovered some papers in the pocket of
the dress which i had taken from your laboratory. at first i had
neglected them, but now that i was able to decipher the characters in
which they were written, i began to study them with diligence. it was
your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. you
minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress
of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic
occurrences. you doubtless recollect these papers. here they are.
everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed
origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances
which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious
and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your own
horrors and rendered mine indelible. i sickened as i read. ‘hateful
day when i received life!’ i exclaimed in agony. ‘accursed creator!
why did you form a monster so hideous that even _you_ turned from me in
disgust? god, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own
image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the
very resemblance. satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire
and encourage him, but i am solitary and abhorred.’

“these were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude;
but when i contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and
benevolent dispositions, i persuaded myself that when they should
become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues they would
compassionate me and overlook my personal deformity. could they turn
from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion
and friendship? i resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way
to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my fate. i
postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance
attached to its success inspired me with a dread lest i should fail.
besides, i found that my understanding improved so much with every
day’s experience that i was unwilling to commence this undertaking
until a few more months should have added to my sagacity.

“several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage. the
presence of safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and i also
found that a greater degree of plenty reigned there. felix and agatha
spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in
their labours by servants. they did not appear rich, but they were
contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while
mine became every day more tumultuous. increase of knowledge only
discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast i was. i
cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when i beheld my person
reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail
image and that inconstant shade.

“i endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial
which in a few months i resolved to undergo; and sometimes i allowed my
thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of paradise, and
dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my
feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed
smiles of consolation. but it was all a dream; no eve soothed my
sorrows nor shared my thoughts; i was alone. i remembered adam’s
supplication to his creator. but where was mine? he had abandoned me,
and in the bitterness of my heart i cursed him.

“autumn passed thus. i saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay
and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it
had worn when i first beheld the woods and the lovely moon. yet i did
not heed the bleakness of the weather; i was better fitted by my
conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. but my chief
delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay
apparel of summer; when those deserted me, i turned with more attention
towards the cottagers. their happiness was not decreased by the
absence of summer. they loved and sympathised with one another; and
their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the
casualties that took place around them. the more i saw of them, the
greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my
heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see
their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost
limit of my ambition. i dared not think that they would turn them from
me with disdain and horror. the poor that stopped at their door were
never driven away. i asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a
little food or rest: i required kindness and sympathy; but i did not
believe myself utterly unworthy of it.

“the winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken
place since i awoke into life. my attention at this time was solely
directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my
protectors. i revolved many projects, but that on which i finally
fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone.
i had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my
person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly
beheld me. my voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; i
thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children i could gain
the good will and mediation of the old de lacey, i might by his means
be tolerated by my younger protectors.

“one day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground
and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, safie, agatha,
and felix departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at his own
desire, was left alone in the cottage. when his children had departed,
he took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet airs, more
sweet and mournful than i had ever heard him play before. at first his
countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as he continued,
thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the
instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.

“my heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which
would decide my hopes or realise my fears. the servants were gone to a
neighbouring fair. all was silent in and around the cottage; it was an
excellent opportunity; yet, when i proceeded to execute my plan, my
limbs failed me and i sank to the ground. again i rose, and exerting
all the firmness of which i was master, removed the planks which i had
placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. the fresh air revived
me, and with renewed determination i approached the door of their
cottage.

“i knocked. ‘who is there?’ said the old man. ‘come in.’

“i entered. ‘pardon this intrusion,’ said i; ‘i am
a traveller in want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you
would allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.’

“‘enter,’ said de lacey, ‘and i will try in what
manner i can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are
from home, and as i am blind, i am afraid i shall find it difficult to
procure food for you.’

“‘do not trouble yourself, my kind host; i have food; it is
warmth and rest only that i need.’

“i sat down, and a silence ensued. i knew that every minute was
precious to me, yet i remained irresolute in what manner to commence
the interview, when the old man addressed me.

‘by your language, stranger, i suppose you are my countryman; are you
french?’

“‘no; but i was educated by a french family and understand that
language only. i am now going to claim the protection of some friends,
whom i sincerely love, and of whose favour i have some hopes.’

“‘are they germans?’

“‘no, they are french. but let us change the subject. i am an
unfortunate and deserted creature, i look around and i have no relation
or friend upon earth. these amiable people to whom i go have never
seen me and know little of me. i am full of fears, for if i fail
there, i am an outcast in the world for ever.’

“‘do not despair. to be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but
the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are
full of brotherly love and charity. rely, therefore, on your hopes;
and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.’

“‘they are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in the world;
but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. i have good
dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree
beneficial; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they
ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detestable
monster.’

“‘that is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot
you undeceive them?’

“‘i am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that i
feel so many overwhelming terrors. i tenderly love these friends; i
have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
kindness towards them; but they believe that i wish to injure them, and
it is that prejudice which i wish to overcome.’

“‘where do these friends reside?’

“‘near this spot.’

“the old man paused and then continued, ‘if you will unreservedly
confide to me the particulars of your tale, i perhaps may be of use in
undeceiving them. i am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but
there is something in your words which persuades me that you are
sincere. i am poor and an exile, but it will afford me true pleasure
to be in any way serviceable to a human creature.’

“‘excellent man! i thank you and accept your generous offer. you
raise me from the dust by this kindness; and i trust that, by your aid,
i shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow
creatures.’

“‘heaven forbid! even if you were really criminal, for that can only
drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. i also am
unfortunate; i and my family have been condemned, although innocent;
judge, therefore, if i do not feel for your misfortunes.’

“‘how can i thank you, my best and only benefactor? from your lips
first have i heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; i shall
be for ever grateful; and your present humanity assures me of success
with those friends whom i am on the point of meeting.’

“‘may i know the names and residence of those friends?’

“i paused. this, i thought, was the moment of decision, which was to
rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. i struggled vainly for
firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my
remaining strength; i sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. at that
moment i heard the steps of my younger protectors. i had not a moment
to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, i cried, ‘now is the
time! save and protect me! you and your family are the friends whom i
seek. do not you desert me in the hour of trial!’

“‘great god!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘who are you?’

“at that instant the cottage door was opened, and felix, safie, and
agatha entered. who can describe their horror and consternation on
beholding me? agatha fainted, and safie, unable to attend to her
friend, rushed out of the cottage. felix darted forward, and with
supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees i clung, in
a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently
with a stick. i could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends
the antelope. but my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and
i refrained. i saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when,
overcome by pain and anguish, i quitted the cottage, and in the general
tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.”




chapter 16


“cursed, cursed creator! why did i live? why, in that instant, did i
not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly
bestowed? i know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my
feelings were those of rage and revenge. i could with pleasure have
destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with
their shrieks and misery.

“when night came i quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood; and
now, no longer restrained by the fear of discovery, i gave vent to my
anguish in fearful howlings. i was like a wild beast that had broken
the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging
through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. oh! what a miserable
night i passed! the cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees
waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of a bird
burst forth amidst the universal stillness. all, save i, were at rest
or in enjoyment; i, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and
finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the trees, spread
havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed
the ruin.

“but this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; i became
fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in
the sick impotence of despair. there was none among the myriads of men
that existed who would pity or assist me; and should i feel kindness
towards my enemies? no; from that moment i declared everlasting war
against the species, and more than all, against him who had formed me
and sent me forth to this insupportable misery.

“the sun rose; i heard the voices of men and knew that it was
impossible to return to my retreat during that day. accordingly i hid
myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours
to reflection on my situation.

“the pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored me to some
degree of tranquillity; and when i considered what had passed at the
cottage, i could not help believing that i had been too hasty in my
conclusions. i had certainly acted imprudently. it was apparent that
my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and i was a
fool in having exposed my person to the horror of his children. i
ought to have familiarised the old de lacey to me, and by degrees to
have discovered myself to the rest of his family, when they should have
been prepared for my approach. but i did not believe my errors to be
irretrievable, and after much consideration i resolved to return to the
cottage, seek the old man, and by my representations win him to my
party.

“these thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon i sank into a profound
sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visited by
peaceful dreams. the horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever
acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged felix
tearing me from his father’s feet. i awoke exhausted, and finding that
it was already night, i crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in
search of food.

“when my hunger was appeased, i directed my steps towards the
well-known path that conducted to the cottage. all there was at peace.
i crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the
accustomed hour when the family arose. that hour passed, the sun
mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. i
trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. the inside
of the cottage was dark, and i heard no motion; i cannot describe the
agony of this suspense.

“presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they
entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but i did not
understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country,
which differed from that of my protectors. soon after, however, felix
approached with another man; i was surprised, as i knew that he had not
quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from
his discourse the meaning of these unusual appearances.

“‘do you consider,’ said his companion to him,
‘that you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose
the produce of your garden? i do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and
i beg therefore that you will take some days to consider of your
determination.’

“‘it is utterly useless,’ replied felix; ‘we can
never again inhabit your cottage. the life of my father is in the greatest
danger, owing to the dreadful circumstance that i have related. my wife and
my sister will never recover from their horror. i entreat you not to reason
with me any more. take possession of your tenement and let me fly from this
place.’

“felix trembled violently as he said this. he and his companion
entered the cottage, in which they remained for a few minutes, and then
departed. i never saw any of the family of de lacey more.

“i continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of
utter and stupid despair. my protectors had departed and had broken
the only link that held me to the world. for the first time the
feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and i did not strive to
control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, i
bent my mind towards injury and death. when i thought of my friends,
of the mild voice of de lacey, the gentle eyes of agatha, and the
exquisite beauty of the arabian, these thoughts vanished and a gush of
tears somewhat soothed me. but again when i reflected that they had
spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to
injure anything human, i turned my fury towards inanimate objects. as
night advanced, i placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage,
and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden,
i waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my
operations.

“as the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly
dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; the blast tore
along like a mighty avalanche and produced a kind of insanity in my
spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection. i lighted the
dry branch of a tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage,
my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon
nearly touched. a part of its orb was at length hid, and i waved my
brand; it sank, and with a loud scream i fired the straw, and heath,
and bushes, which i had collected. the wind fanned the fire, and the
cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and
licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.

“as soon as i was convinced that no assistance could save any part of
the habitation, i quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods.

“and now, with the world before me, whither should i bend my steps? i
resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated
and despised, every country must be equally horrible. at length the
thought of you crossed my mind. i learned from your papers that you
were my father, my creator; and to whom could i apply with more fitness
than to him who had given me life? among the lessons that felix had
bestowed upon safie, geography had not been omitted; i had learned from
these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth.
you had mentioned geneva as the name of your native town, and towards
this place i resolved to proceed.

“but how was i to direct myself? i knew that i must travel in a
southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was my
only guide. i did not know the names of the towns that i was to pass
through, nor could i ask information from a single human being; but i
did not despair. from you only could i hope for succour, although
towards you i felt no sentiment but that of hatred. unfeeling,
heartless creator! you had endowed me with perceptions and passions
and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind.
but on you only had i any claim for pity and redress, and from you i
determined to seek that justice which i vainly attempted to gain from
any other being that wore the human form.

“my travels were long and the sufferings i endured intense. it was
late in autumn when i quitted the district where i had so long resided.
i travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a
human being. nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless;
rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface
of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and i found no shelter. oh,
earth! how often did i imprecate curses on the cause of my being! the
mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall
and bitterness. the nearer i approached to your habitation, the more
deeply did i feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart. snow
fell, and the waters were hardened, but i rested not. a few incidents
now and then directed me, and i possessed a map of the country; but i
often wandered wide from my path. the agony of my feelings allowed me
no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could
not extract its food; but a circumstance that happened when i arrived
on the confines of switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth
and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial
manner the bitterness and horror of my feelings.

“i generally rested during the day and travelled only when i was
secured by night from the view of man. one morning, however, finding
that my path lay through a deep wood, i ventured to continue my journey
after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring,
cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of
the air. i felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long
appeared dead, revive within me. half surprised by the novelty of
these sensations, i allowed myself to be borne away by them, and
forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. soft tears
again bedewed my cheeks, and i even raised my humid eyes with
thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me.

“i continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until i came to its
boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into which many
of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring.
here i paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when i heard
the sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade
of a cypress. i was scarcely hid when a young girl came running
towards the spot where i was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from
someone in sport. she continued her course along the precipitous sides
of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into the
rapid stream. i rushed from my hiding-place and with extreme labour,
from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore. she
was senseless, and i endeavoured by every means in my power to restore
animation, when i was suddenly interrupted by the approach of a rustic,
who was probably the person from whom she had playfully fled. on
seeing me, he darted towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms,
hastened towards the deeper parts of the wood. i followed speedily, i
hardly knew why; but when the man saw me draw near, he aimed a gun,
which he carried, at my body and fired. i sank to the ground, and my
injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.

“this was then the reward of my benevolence! i had saved a human being
from destruction, and as a recompense i now writhed under the miserable
pain of a wound which shattered the flesh and bone. the feelings of
kindness and gentleness which i had entertained but a few moments
before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. inflamed by
pain, i vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. but the
agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and i fainted.

“for some weeks i led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to
cure the wound which i had received. the ball had entered my shoulder,
and i knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any
rate i had no means of extracting it. my sufferings were augmented
also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their
infliction. my daily vows rose for revenge—a deep and deadly revenge,
such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish i had
endured.

“after some weeks my wound healed, and i continued my journey. the
labours i endured were no longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or
gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but a mockery which insulted my
desolate state and made me feel more painfully that i was not made for
the enjoyment of pleasure.

“but my toils now drew near a close, and in two months from this time i
reached the environs of geneva.

“it was evening when i arrived, and i retired to a hiding-place among
the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner i should apply
to you. i was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to
enjoy the gentle breezes of evening or the prospect of the sun setting
behind the stupendous mountains of jura.

“at this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection,
which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, who came
running into the recess i had chosen, with all the sportiveness of
infancy. suddenly, as i gazed on him, an idea seized me that this
little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short a time to have
imbibed a horror of deformity. if, therefore, i could seize him and
educate him as my companion and friend, i should not be so desolate in
this peopled earth.

“urged by this impulse, i seized on the boy as he passed and drew him
towards me. as soon as he beheld my form, he placed his hands before
his eyes and uttered a shrill scream; i drew his hand forcibly from his
face and said, ‘child, what is the meaning of this? i do not intend to
hurt you; listen to me.’

“he struggled violently. ‘let me go,’ he cried;
‘monster! ugly wretch! you wish to eat me and tear me to pieces. you
are an ogre. let me go, or i will tell my papa.’

“‘boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.’

“‘hideous monster! let me go. my papa is a syndic—he is m.
frankenstein—he will punish you. you dare not keep me.’

“‘frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy—to him towards whom i have
sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.’

“the child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which carried
despair to my heart; i grasped his throat to silence him, and in a
moment he lay dead at my feet.

“i gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish
triumph; clapping my hands, i exclaimed, ‘i too can create desolation;
my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and
a thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.’

“as i fixed my eyes on the child, i saw something glittering on his
breast. i took it; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. in spite
of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. for a few moments i
gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her
lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; i remembered that i was
for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could
bestow and that she whose resemblance i contemplated would, in
regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one
expressive of disgust and affright.

“can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage? i only
wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in
exclamations and agony, i did not rush among mankind and perish in the
attempt to destroy them.

“while i was overcome by these feelings, i left the spot where i had
committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place, i
entered a barn which had appeared to me to be empty. a woman was
sleeping on some straw; she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her
whose portrait i held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the
loveliness of youth and health. here, i thought, is one of those whose
joy-imparting smiles are bestowed on all but me. and then i bent over
her and whispered, ‘awake, fairest, thy lover is near—he who would
give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine eyes; my
beloved, awake!’

“the sleeper stirred; a thrill of terror ran through me. should she
indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer? thus
would she assuredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she beheld me.
the thought was madness; it stirred the fiend within me—not i, but
she, shall suffer; the murder i have committed because i am for ever
robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone. the crime had
its source in her; be hers the punishment! thanks to the lessons of
felix and the sanguinary laws of man, i had learned now to work
mischief. i bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of
the folds of her dress. she moved again, and i fled.

“for some days i haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place,
sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and
its miseries for ever. at length i wandered towards these mountains,
and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning
passion which you alone can gratify. we may not part until you have
promised to comply with my requisition. i am alone and miserable; man
will not associate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself
would not deny herself to me. my companion must be of the same species
and have the same defects. this being you must create.”




chapter 17


the being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the
expectation of a reply. but i was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to
arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his
proposition. he continued,

“you must create a female for me with whom i can live in the
interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being. this you alone
can do, and i demand it of you as a right which you must not refuse to
concede.”

the latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had
died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and
as he said this i could no longer suppress the rage that burned within
me.

“i do refuse it,” i replied; “and no torture shall ever extort a
consent from me. you may render me the most miserable of men, but you
shall never make me base in my own eyes. shall i create another like
yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. begone! i
have answered you; you may torture me, but i will never consent.”

“you are in the wrong,” replied the fiend; “and instead
of threatening, i am content to reason with you. i am malicious because i
am miserable. am i not shunned and hated by all mankind? you, my creator,
would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me why i
should pity man more than he pities me? you would not call it murder if you
could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts and destroy my frame, the
work of your own hands. shall i respect man when he condemns me? let him
live with me in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury i would
bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance.
but that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our
union. yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery. i will
revenge my injuries; if i cannot inspire love, i will cause fear, and
chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do i swear
inextinguishable hatred. have a care; i will work at your destruction, nor
finish until i desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of
your birth.”

a fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was wrinkled
into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently
he calmed himself and proceeded—

“i intended to reason. this passion is detrimental to me, for you do
not reflect that _you_ are the cause of its excess. if any being felt
emotions of benevolence towards me, i should return them a hundred and a
hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake i would make peace with the
whole kind! but i now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised.
what i ask of you is reasonable and moderate; i demand a creature of
another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is small, but it
is all that i can receive, and it shall content me. it is true, we shall be
monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more
attached to one another. our lives will not be happy, but they will be
harmless and free from the misery i now feel. oh! my creator, make me
happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! let me see that i
excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my
request!”

i was moved. i shuddered when i thought of the possible consequences
of my consent, but i felt that there was some justice in his argument.
his tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be a creature
of fine sensations, and did i not as his maker owe him all the portion
of happiness that it was in my power to bestow? he saw my change of
feeling and continued,

“if you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see
us again; i will go to the vast wilds of south america. my food is not
that of man; i do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite;
acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment. my companion will
be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare.
we shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on
man and will ripen our food. the picture i present to you is peaceful
and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the
wantonness of power and cruelty. pitiless as you have been towards me,
i now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment
and persuade you to promise what i so ardently desire.”

“you propose,” replied i, “to fly from the habitations of
man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your
only companions. how can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man,
persevere in this exile? you will return and again seek their kindness, and
you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed,
and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of destruction.
this may not be; cease to argue the point, for i cannot consent.”

“how inconstant are your feelings! but a moment ago you were moved by
my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints?
i swear to you, by the earth which i inhabit, and by you that made me, that
with the companion you bestow, i will quit the neighbourhood of man and
dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places. my evil passions
will have fled, for i shall meet with sympathy! my life will flow quietly
away, and in my dying moments i shall not curse my maker.”

his words had a strange effect upon me. i compassionated him and
sometimes felt a wish to console him, but when i looked upon him, when
i saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my
feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. i tried to stifle
these sensations; i thought that as i could not sympathise with him, i
had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which
was yet in my power to bestow.

“you swear,” i said, “to be harmless; but have you not
already shown a degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust
you? may not even this be a feint that will increase your triumph by
affording a wider scope for your revenge?”

“how is this? i must not be trifled with, and i demand an answer. if
i have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion;
the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and i shall
become a thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant. my vices
are the children of a forced solitude that i abhor, and my virtues will
necessarily arise when i live in communion with an equal. i shall feel
the affections of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of
existence and events from which i am now excluded.”

i paused some time to reflect on all he had related and the various
arguments which he had employed. i thought of the promise of virtues which
he had displayed on the opening of his existence and the subsequent blight
of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protectors had
manifested towards him. his power and threats were not omitted in my
calculations; a creature who could exist in the ice-caves of the glaciers
and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices
was a being possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with. after a
long pause of reflection i concluded that the justice due both to him and
my fellow creatures demanded of me that i should comply with his request.
turning to him, therefore, i said,

“i consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit europe for ever,
and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as i shall
deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you in your exile.”

“i swear,” he cried, “by the sun, and by the blue sky of
heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my
prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again. depart to your
home and commence your labours; i shall watch their progress with
unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready i shall
appear.”

saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in
my sentiments. i saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than
the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the undulations of the
sea of ice.

his tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of
the horizon when he departed. i knew that i ought to hasten my descent
towards the valley, as i should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my
heart was heavy, and my steps slow. the labour of winding among the
little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as i advanced
perplexed me, occupied as i was by the emotions which the occurrences
of the day had produced. night was far advanced when i came to the
halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. the stars
shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines
rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the
ground; it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange
thoughts within me. i wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, i
exclaimed, “oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock
me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as
nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.”

these were wild and miserable thoughts, but i cannot describe to you
how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how i
listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its
way to consume me.

morning dawned before i arrived at the village of chamounix; i took no
rest, but returned immediately to geneva. even in my own heart i could
give no expression to my sensations—they weighed on me with a
mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
thus i returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the
family. my haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but i
answered no question, scarcely did i speak. i felt as if i were placed
under a ban—as if i had no right to claim their sympathies—as if
never more might i enjoy companionship with them. yet even thus i
loved them to adoration; and to save them, i resolved to dedicate
myself to my most abhorred task. the prospect of such an occupation
made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream,
and that thought only had to me the reality of life.




chapter 18


day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to geneva; and
i could not collect the courage to recommence my work. i feared the
vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet i was unable to overcome my
repugnance to the task which was enjoined me. i found that i could not
compose a female without again devoting several months to profound
study and laborious disquisition. i had heard of some discoveries
having been made by an english philosopher, the knowledge of which was
material to my success, and i sometimes thought of obtaining my
father’s consent to visit england for this purpose; but i clung to
every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an
undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to
me. a change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had
hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when
unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. my
father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts
towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy,
which every now and then would return by fits, and with a devouring
blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. at these moments i took
refuge in the most perfect solitude. i passed whole days on the lake
alone in a little boat, watching the clouds and listening to the
rippling of the waves, silent and listless. but the fresh air and
bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of composure, and
on my return i met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile
and a more cheerful heart.

it was after my return from one of these rambles that my father,
calling me aside, thus addressed me,

“i am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former
pleasures and seem to be returning to yourself. and yet you are still
unhappy and still avoid our society. for some time i was lost in
conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me,
and if it is well founded, i conjure you to avow it. reserve on such a
point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.”

i trembled violently at his exordium, and my father continued—

“i confess, my son, that i have always looked forward to your
marriage with our dear elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the
stay of my declining years. you were attached to each other from your
earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and
tastes, entirely suited to one another. but so blind is the experience of
man that what i conceived to be the best assistants to my plan may have
entirely destroyed it. you, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any
wish that she might become your wife. nay, you may have met with another
whom you may love; and considering yourself as bound in honour to
elizabeth, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you appear
to feel.”

“my dear father, reassure yourself. i love my cousin tenderly and
sincerely. i never saw any woman who excited, as elizabeth does, my
warmest admiration and affection. my future hopes and prospects are
entirely bound up in the expectation of our union.”

“the expression of your sentiments of this subject, my dear victor,
gives me more pleasure than i have for some time experienced. if you
feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast
a gloom over us. but it is this gloom which appears to have taken so
strong a hold of your mind that i wish to dissipate. tell me,
therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnisation of the
marriage. we have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us
from that everyday tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. you
are younger; yet i do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent
fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future
plans of honour and utility that you may have formed. do not suppose,
however, that i wish to dictate happiness to you or that a delay on
your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. interpret my words
with candour and answer me, i conjure you, with confidence and
sincerity.”

i listened to my father in silence and remained for some time incapable
of offering any reply. i revolved rapidly in my mind a multitude of
thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion. alas! to me
the idea of an immediate union with my elizabeth was one of horror and
dismay. i was bound by a solemn promise which i had not yet fulfilled
and dared not break, or if i did, what manifold miseries might not
impend over me and my devoted family! could i enter into a festival
with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the
ground? i must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with
his mate before i allowed myself to enjoy the delight of a union from
which i expected peace.

i remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to
england or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers
of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable
use to me in my present undertaking. the latter method of obtaining
the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, i
had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my
loathsome task in my father’s house while in habits of familiar
intercourse with those i loved. i knew that a thousand fearful
accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to
thrill all connected with me with horror. i was aware also that i
should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the
harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my
unearthly occupation. i must absent myself from all i loved while thus
employed. once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and i might be
restored to my family in peace and happiness. my promise fulfilled,
the monster would depart for ever. or (so my fond fancy imaged) some
accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my
slavery for ever.

these feelings dictated my answer to my father. i expressed a wish to
visit england, but concealing the true reasons of this request, i
clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while i
urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to
comply. after so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that
resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to find
that i was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such a journey,
and he hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my
return, have restored me entirely to myself.

the duration of my absence was left to my own choice; a few months, or
at most a year, was the period contemplated. one paternal kind
precaution he had taken to ensure my having a companion. without
previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with elizabeth,
arranged that clerval should join me at strasburgh. this interfered
with the solitude i coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the
commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in no way be
an impediment, and truly i rejoiced that thus i should be saved many
hours of lonely, maddening reflection. nay, henry might stand between
me and the intrusion of my foe. if i were alone, would he not at times
force his abhorred presence on me to remind me of my task or to
contemplate its progress?

to england, therefore, i was bound, and it was understood that my union
with elizabeth should take place immediately on my return. my father’s
age rendered him extremely averse to delay. for myself, there was one
reward i promised myself from my detested toils—one consolation for my
unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that day when,
enfranchised from my miserable slavery, i might claim elizabeth and
forget the past in my union with her.

i now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling haunted me
which filled me with fear and agitation. during my absence i should
leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy and
unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might be by my
departure. but he had promised to follow me wherever i might go, and
would he not accompany me to england? this imagination was dreadful in
itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends.
i was agonised with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of
this might happen. but through the whole period during which i was the
slave of my creature i allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of
the moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the fiend
would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his
machinations.

it was in the latter end of september that i again quitted my native
country. my journey had been my own suggestion, and elizabeth
therefore acquiesced, but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of
my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery and grief. it had
been her care which provided me a companion in clerval—and yet a man
is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s
sedulous attention. she longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand
conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent
farewell.

i threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, hardly
knowing whither i was going, and careless of what was passing around.
i remembered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that i reflected on
it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with
me. filled with dreary imaginations, i passed through many beautiful
and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. i could
only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to occupy
me whilst they endured.

after some days spent in listless indolence, during which i traversed
many leagues, i arrived at strasburgh, where i waited two days for
clerval. he came. alas, how great was the contrast between us! he
was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw the beauties of the
setting sun, and more happy when he beheld it rise and recommence a new
day. he pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape and
the appearances of the sky. “this is what it is to live,” he cried;
“now i enjoy existence! but you, my dear frankenstein, wherefore are
you desponding and sorrowful!” in truth, i was occupied by gloomy
thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden
sunrise reflected in the rhine. and you, my friend, would be far more
amused with the journal of clerval, who observed the scenery with an
eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections. i, a
miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to
enjoyment.

we had agreed to descend the rhine in a boat from strasburgh to
rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for london. during this
voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns.
we stayed a day at mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from
strasburgh, arrived at mainz. the course of the rhine below mainz
becomes much more picturesque. the river descends rapidly and winds
between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. we saw
many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by
black woods, high and inaccessible. this part of the rhine, indeed,
presents a singularly variegated landscape. in one spot you view
rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with
the dark rhine rushing beneath; and on the sudden turn of a promontory,
flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river
and populous towns occupy the scene.

we travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the song of the labourers
as we glided down the stream. even i, depressed in mind, and my spirits
continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even i was pleased. i lay at the
bottom of the boat, and as i gazed on the cloudless blue sky, i seemed to
drink in a tranquillity to which i had long been a stranger. and if these
were my sensations, who can describe those of henry? he felt as if he had
been transported to fairy-land and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by
man. “i have seen,” he said, “the most beautiful scenes
of my own country; i have visited the lakes of lucerne and uri, where the
snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black
and impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and mournful appearance
were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay
appearance; i have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore
up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be
on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain,
where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and
where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the
nightly wind; i have seen the mountains of la valais, and the pays de vaud;
but this country, victor, pleases me more than all those wonders. the
mountains of switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a
charm in the banks of this divine river that i never before saw equalled.
look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the
island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now
that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village
half hid in the recess of the mountain. oh, surely the spirit that inhabits
and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man than those who
pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of
our own country.”

clerval! beloved friend! even now it delights me to record your words and
to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving. he was a
being formed in the “very poetry of nature.” his wild and
enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart. his
soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that
devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for only
in the imagination. but even human sympathies were not sufficient to
satisfy his eager mind. the scenery of external nature, which others regard
only with admiration, he loved with ardour:—

    ——the sounding cataract
    haunted him like a passion: the tall rock,
    the mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
    their colours and their forms, were then to him
    an appetite; a feeling, and a love,
    that had no need of a remoter charm,
    by thought supplied, or any interest
    unborrow’d from the eye.

          [wordsworth’s “tintern abbey”.]

and where does he now exist? is this gentle and lovely being lost
for ever? has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful
and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the
life of its creator;—has this mind perished? does it now only exist
in my memory? no, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and
beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and
consoles your unhappy friend.

pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight
tribute to the unexampled worth of henry, but they soothe my heart,
overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. i will
proceed with my tale.

beyond cologne we descended to the plains of holland; and we resolved to
post the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of
the river was too gentle to aid us.

our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we
arrived in a few days at rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to england.
it was on a clear morning, in the latter days of december, that i first saw
the white cliffs of britain. the banks of the thames presented a new scene;
they were flat but fertile, and almost every town was marked by the
remembrance of some story. we saw tilbury fort and remembered the spanish
armada, gravesend, woolwich, and greenwich—places which i had heard
of even in my country.

at length we saw the numerous steeples of london, st. paul’s towering
above all, and the tower famed in english history.




chapter 19


london was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several
months in this wonderful and celebrated city. clerval desired the
intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this
time, but this was with me a secondary object; i was principally
occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary for the
completion of my promise and quickly availed myself of the letters of
introduction that i had brought with me, addressed to the most
distinguished natural philosophers.

if this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness,
it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure. but a blight had
come over my existence, and i only visited these people for the sake of
the information they might give me on the subject in which my interest
was so terribly profound. company was irksome to me; when alone, i
could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of
henry soothed me, and i could thus cheat myself into a transitory
peace. but busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to
my heart. i saw an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my
fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of william and
justine, and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled
my soul with anguish.

but in clerval i saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive
and anxious to gain experience and instruction. the difference of
manners which he observed was to him an inexhaustible source of
instruction and amusement. he was also pursuing an object he had long
had in view. his design was to visit india, in the belief that he had
in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the views he had
taken of its society, the means of materially assisting the progress of
european colonization and trade. in britain only could he further the
execution of his plan. he was for ever busy, and the only check to his
enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. i tried to conceal this
as much as possible, that i might not debar him from the pleasures
natural to one who was entering on a new scene of life, undisturbed by
any care or bitter recollection. i often refused to accompany him,
alleging another engagement, that i might remain alone. i now also
began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this
was to me like the torture of single drops of water continually falling
on the head. every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme
anguish, and every word that i spoke in allusion to it caused my lips
to quiver, and my heart to palpitate.

after passing some months in london, we received a letter from a person in
scotland who had formerly been our visitor at geneva. he mentioned the
beauties of his native country and asked us if those were not sufficient
allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as perth,
where he resided. clerval eagerly desired to accept this invitation, and i,
although i abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and
all the wondrous works with which nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places.

we had arrived in england at the beginning of october, and it was now
february. we accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the
north at the expiration of another month. in this expedition we did not
intend to follow the great road to edinburgh, but to visit windsor, oxford,
matlock, and the cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of
this tour about the end of july. i packed up my chemical instruments and
the materials i had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some
obscure nook in the northern highlands of scotland.

we quitted london on the 27th of march and remained a few days at
windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. this was a new scene to us
mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of
stately deer were all novelties to us.

from thence we proceeded to oxford. as we entered this city, our minds
were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been transacted
there more than a century and a half before. it was here that charles
i. had collected his forces. this city had remained faithful to him,
after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of
parliament and liberty. the memory of that unfortunate king and his
companions, the amiable falkland, the insolent goring, his queen, and
son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city which they
might be supposed to have inhabited. the spirit of elder days found a
dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. if these
feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of
the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration.
the colleges are ancient and picturesque; the streets are almost
magnificent; and the lovely isis, which flows beside it through meadows
of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into a placid expanse of waters,
which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and
domes, embosomed among aged trees.

i enjoyed this scene, and yet my enjoyment was embittered both by the
memory of the past and the anticipation of the future. i was formed
for peaceful happiness. during my youthful days discontent never
visited my mind, and if i was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of what
is beautiful in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime in
the productions of man could always interest my heart and communicate
elasticity to my spirits. but i am a blasted tree; the bolt has
entered my soul; and i felt then that i should survive to exhibit what
i shall soon cease to be—a miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity,
pitiable to others and intolerable to myself.

we passed a considerable period at oxford, rambling among its environs
and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most
animating epoch of english history. our little voyages of discovery
were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented
themselves. we visited the tomb of the illustrious hampden and the
field on which that patriot fell. for a moment my soul was elevated
from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas
of liberty and self-sacrifice of which these sights were the monuments
and the remembrancers. for an instant i dared to shake off my chains
and look around me with a free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten
into my flesh, and i sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my
miserable self.

we left oxford with regret and proceeded to matlock, which was our next
place of rest. the country in the neighbourhood of this village
resembled, to a greater degree, the scenery of switzerland; but
everything is on a lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of
distant white alps which always attend on the piny mountains of my
native country. we visited the wondrous cave and the little cabinets
of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same
manner as in the collections at servox and chamounix. the latter name
made me tremble when pronounced by henry, and i hastened to quit
matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus associated.

from derby, still journeying northwards, we passed two months in
cumberland and westmorland. i could now almost fancy myself among the
swiss mountains. the little patches of snow which yet lingered on the
northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the
rocky streams were all familiar and dear sights to me. here also we
made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat me into
happiness. the delight of clerval was proportionably greater than
mine; his mind expanded in the company of men of talent, and he found
in his own nature greater capacities and resources than he could have
imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his
inferiors. “i could pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among
these mountains i should scarcely regret switzerland and the rhine.”

but he found that a traveller’s life is one that includes much pain
amidst its enjoyments. his feelings are for ever on the stretch; and
when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit
that on which he rests in pleasure for something new, which again
engages his attention, and which also he forsakes for other novelties.

we had scarcely visited the various lakes of cumberland and westmorland
and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants when the period
of our appointment with our scotch friend approached, and we left them
to travel on. for my own part i was not sorry. i had now neglected my
promise for some time, and i feared the effects of the dæmon’s
disappointment. he might remain in switzerland and wreak his vengeance
on my relatives. this idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment
from which i might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. i waited
for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were delayed i was
miserable and overcome by a thousand fears; and when they arrived and i
saw the superscription of elizabeth or my father, i hardly dared to
read and ascertain my fate. sometimes i thought that the fiend
followed me and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion.
when these thoughts possessed me, i would not quit henry for a moment,
but followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of
his destroyer. i felt as if i had committed some great crime, the
consciousness of which haunted me. i was guiltless, but i had indeed
drawn down a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime.

i visited edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might
have interested the most unfortunate being. clerval did not like it so well
as oxford, for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him.
but the beauty and regularity of the new town of edinburgh, its romantic
castle and its environs, the most delightful in the world, arthur’s
seat, st. bernard’s well, and the pentland hills, compensated him for
the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. but i was
impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.

we left edinburgh in a week, passing through coupar, st. andrew’s, and
along the banks of the tay, to perth, where our friend expected us.
but i was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers or enter into
their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest; and
accordingly i told clerval that i wished to make the tour of scotland
alone. “do you,” said i, “enjoy yourself, and let this be our
rendezvous. i may be absent a month or two; but do not interfere with
my motions, i entreat you; leave me to peace and solitude for a short
time; and when i return, i hope it will be with a lighter heart, more
congenial to your own temper.”

henry wished to dissuade me, but seeing me bent on this plan, ceased to
remonstrate. he entreated me to write often. “i had rather be with
you,” he said, “in your solitary rambles, than with these scotch
people, whom i do not know; hasten, then, my dear friend, to return,
that i may again feel myself somewhat at home, which i cannot do in
your absence.”

having parted from my friend, i determined to visit some remote spot of
scotland and finish my work in solitude. i did not doubt but that the
monster followed me and would discover himself to me when i should have
finished, that he might receive his companion.

with this resolution i traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of
the remotest of the orkneys as the scene of my labours. it was a place
fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a rock whose high sides were
continually beaten upon by the waves. the soil was barren, scarcely
affording pasture for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its
inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs
gave tokens of their miserable fare. vegetables and bread, when they
indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured from
the mainland, which was about five miles distant.

on the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of
these was vacant when i arrived. this i hired. it contained but two
rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable
penury. the thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the
door was off its hinges. i ordered it to be repaired, bought some
furniture, and took possession, an incident which would doubtless have
occasioned some surprise had not all the senses of the cottagers been
benumbed by want and squalid poverty. as it was, i lived ungazed at
and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes
which i gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations
of men.

in this retreat i devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening,
when the weather permitted, i walked on the stony beach of the sea to
listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my feet. it was a
monotonous yet ever-changing scene. i thought of switzerland; it was
far different from this desolate and appalling landscape. its hills
are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the
plains. its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky, and when
troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a lively
infant when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.

in this manner i distributed my occupations when i first arrived, but
as i proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and
irksome to me. sometimes i could not prevail on myself to enter my
laboratory for several days, and at other times i toiled day and night
in order to complete my work. it was, indeed, a filthy process in
which i was engaged. during my first experiment, a kind of
enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me to the horror of my employment; my
mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour, and my eyes
were shut to the horror of my proceedings. but now i went to it in
cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands.

thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in
a solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from
the actual scene in which i was engaged, my spirits became unequal; i
grew restless and nervous. every moment i feared to meet my
persecutor. sometimes i sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing
to raise them lest they should encounter the object which i so much
dreaded to behold. i feared to wander from the sight of my fellow
creatures lest when alone he should come to claim his companion.

in the mean time i worked on, and my labour was already considerably
advanced. i looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager
hope, which i dared not trust myself to question but which was
intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken
in my bosom.




chapter 20


i sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon was just
rising from the sea; i had not sufficient light for my employment, and i
remained idle, in a pause of consideration of whether i should leave my
labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention
to it. as i sat, a train of reflection occurred to me which led me to
consider the effects of what i was now doing. three years before, i was
engaged in the same manner and had created a fiend whose unparalleled
barbarity had desolated my heart and filled it for ever with the bitterest
remorse. i was now about to form another being of whose dispositions i was
alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant than her
mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. he had
sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she
had not; and she, who in all probability was to become a thinking and
reasoning animal, might refuse to comply with a compact made before her
creation. they might even hate each other; the creature who already lived
loathed his own deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence
for it when it came before his eyes in the female form? she also might turn
with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit him,
and he be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of being
deserted by one of his own species.

even if they were to leave europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world,
yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon
thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon
the earth who might make the very existence of the species of man a
condition precarious and full of terror. had i right, for my own benefit,
to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? i had before been moved
by the sophisms of the being i had created; i had been struck senseless by
his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my
promise burst upon me; i shuddered to think that future ages might curse me
as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at
the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race.

i trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on looking up, i saw by
the light of the moon the dæmon at the casement. a ghastly grin
wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where i sat fulfilling the task
which he had allotted to me. yes, he had followed me in my travels; he
had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide
and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the
fulfilment of my promise.

as i looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of
malice and treachery. i thought with a sensation of madness on my
promise of creating another like to him, and trembling with passion,
tore to pieces the thing on which i was engaged. the wretch saw me
destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for
happiness, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.

i left the room, and locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own
heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling steps, i
sought my own apartment. i was alone; none were near me to dissipate
the gloom and relieve me from the sickening oppression of the most
terrible reveries.

several hours passed, and i remained near my window gazing on the sea;
it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature
reposed under the eye of the quiet moon. a few fishing vessels alone
specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound
of voices as the fishermen called to one another. i felt the silence,
although i was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear
was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a
person landed close to my house.

in a few minutes after, i heard the creaking of my door, as if some one
endeavoured to open it softly. i trembled from head to foot; i felt a
presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peasants who
dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but i was overcome by the sensation
of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain
endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot.

presently i heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door
opened, and the wretch whom i dreaded appeared. shutting the door, he
approached me and said in a smothered voice,

“you have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you
intend? do you dare to break your promise? i have endured toil and misery;
i left switzerland with you; i crept along the shores of the rhine, among
its willow islands and over the summits of its hills. i have dwelt many
months in the heaths of england and among the deserts of scotland. i have
endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my
hopes?”

“begone! i do break my promise; never will i create another like
yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness.”

“slave, i before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself
unworthy of my condescension. remember that i have power; you believe
yourself miserable, but i can make you so wretched that the light of
day will be hateful to you. you are my creator, but i am your master;
obey!”

“the hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is
arrived. your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness; but
they confirm me in a determination of not creating you a companion in
vice. shall i, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a dæmon whose
delight is in death and wretchedness? begone! i am firm, and your
words will only exasperate my rage.”

the monster saw my determination in my face and gnashed his teeth in the
impotence of anger. “shall each man,” cried he, “find a
wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and i be alone? i had
feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
man! you may hate, but beware! your hours will pass in dread and misery,
and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you your happiness for
ever. are you to be happy while i grovel in the intensity of my
wretchedness? you can blast my other passions, but revenge
remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! i may die, but
first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your
misery. beware, for i am fearless and therefore powerful. i will watch with
the wiliness of a snake, that i may sting with its venom. man, you shall
repent of the injuries you inflict.”

“devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
i have declared my resolution to you, and i am no coward to bend
beneath words. leave me; i am inexorable.”

“it is well. i go; but remember, i shall be with you on your
wedding-night.”

i started forward and exclaimed, “villain! before you sign my
death-warrant, be sure that you are yourself safe.”

i would have seized him, but he eluded me and quitted the house with
precipitation. in a few moments i saw him in his boat, which shot
across the waters with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amidst the
waves.

all was again silent, but his words rang in my ears. i burned with rage to
pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean. i
walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination
conjured up a thousand images to torment and sting me. why had i not
followed him and closed with him in mortal strife? but i had suffered him
to depart, and he had directed his course towards the mainland. i shuddered
to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge.
and then i thought again of his words—“_i will be with you on
your wedding-night._” that, then, was the period fixed for the
fulfilment of my destiny. in that hour i should die and at once satisfy and
extinguish his malice. the prospect did not move me to fear; yet when i
thought of my beloved elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she
should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first i
had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and i resolved not to fall
before my enemy without a bitter struggle.

the night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings became
calmer, if it may be called calmness when the violence of rage sinks into
the depths of despair. i left the house, the horrid scene of the last
night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which i
almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and my fellow
creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole across me. i
desired that i might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true,
but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. if i returned, it was to
be sacrificed or to see those whom i most loved die under the grasp of a
dæmon whom i had myself created.

i walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all it
loved and miserable in the separation. when it became noon, and the
sun rose higher, i lay down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep
sleep. i had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves
were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. the sleep
into which i now sank refreshed me; and when i awoke, i again felt as
if i belonged to a race of human beings like myself, and i began to
reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the
words of the fiend rang in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared
like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality.

the sun had far descended, and i still sat on the shore, satisfying my
appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when i saw a
fishing-boat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet;
it contained letters from geneva, and one from clerval entreating me to
join him. he said that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where
he was, that letters from the friends he had formed in london desired
his return to complete the negotiation they had entered into for his
indian enterprise. he could not any longer delay his departure; but as
his journey to london might be followed, even sooner than he now
conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to bestow as much of
my society on him as i could spare. he besought me, therefore, to
leave my solitary isle and to meet him at perth, that we might proceed
southwards together. this letter in a degree recalled me to life, and
i determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days.

yet, before i departed, there was a task to perform, on which i shuddered
to reflect; i must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose i
must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and i must
handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to me. the next
morning, at daybreak, i summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door
of my laboratory. the remains of the half-finished creature, whom i had
destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and i almost felt as if i had
mangled the living flesh of a human being. i paused to collect myself and
then entered the chamber. with trembling hand i conveyed the instruments
out of the room, but i reflected that i ought not to leave the relics of my
work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and i accordingly
put them into a basket, with a great quantity of stones, and laying them
up, determined to throw them into the sea that very night; and in the
meantime i sat upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging my
chemical apparatus.

nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place
in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the dæmon. i had
before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with
whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but i now felt as if a film
had been taken from before my eyes and that i for the first time saw
clearly. the idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur
to me; the threat i had heard weighed on my thoughts, but i did not
reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. i had resolved in
my own mind that to create another like the fiend i had first made
would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and i
banished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different
conclusion.

between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and i then, putting my
basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore.
the scene was perfectly solitary; a few boats were returning towards land,
but i sailed away from them. i felt as if i was about the commission of a
dreadful crime and avoided with shuddering anxiety any encounter with my
fellow creatures. at one time the moon, which had before been clear, was
suddenly overspread by a thick cloud, and i took advantage of the moment of
darkness and cast my basket into the sea; i listened to the gurgling sound
as it sank and then sailed away from the spot. the sky became clouded, but
the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then
rising. but it refreshed me and filled me with such agreeable sensations
that i resolved to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a
direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the boat. clouds hid the
moon, everything was obscure, and i heard only the sound of the boat as its
keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in a short time i
slept soundly.

i do not know how long i remained in this situation, but when i awoke i
found that the sun had already mounted considerably. the wind was high, and
the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff. i found
that the wind was northeast and must have driven me far from the coast from
which i had embarked. i endeavoured to change my course but quickly found
that if i again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with
water. thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. i
confess that i felt a few sensations of terror. i had no compass with me
and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the
world that the sun was of little benefit to me. i might be driven into the
wide atlantic and feel all the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in
the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. i had already
been out many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to
my other sufferings. i looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds
that flew before the wind, only to be replaced by others; i looked upon the
sea; it was to be my grave. “fiend,” i exclaimed, “your
task is already fulfilled!” i thought of elizabeth, of my father, and
of clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his
sanguinary and merciless passions. this idea plunged me into a reverie so
despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the point of
closing before me for ever, i shudder to reflect on it.

some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the
horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze and the sea became
free from breakers. but these gave place to a heavy swell; i felt sick
and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly i saw a line of high
land towards the south.

almost spent, as i was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense i endured
for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a flood of
warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.

how mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have
of life even in the excess of misery! i constructed another sail with a
part of my dress and eagerly steered my course towards the land. it had a
wild and rocky appearance, but as i approached nearer i easily perceived
the traces of cultivation. i saw vessels near the shore and found myself
suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood of civilised man. i
carefully traced the windings of the land and hailed a steeple which i at
length saw issuing from behind a small promontory. as i was in a state of
extreme debility, i resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place
where i could most easily procure nourishment. fortunately i had money with
me. as i turned the promontory i perceived a small neat town and a good
harbour, which i entered, my heart bounding with joy at my unexpected
escape.

as i was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several
people crowded towards the spot. they seemed much surprised at my
appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered
together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me
a slight sensation of alarm. as it was, i merely remarked that they
spoke english, and i therefore addressed them in that language. “my
good friends,” said i, “will you be so kind as to tell me the name of
this town and inform me where i am?”

“you will know that soon enough,” replied a man with a hoarse voice.
“maybe you are come to a place that will not prove much to your taste,
but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, i promise you.”

i was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a
stranger, and i was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and
angry countenances of his companions. “why do you answer me so
roughly?” i replied. “surely it is not the custom of englishmen to
receive strangers so inhospitably.”

“i do not know,” said the man, “what the custom of the
english may be, but it is the custom of the irish to hate villains.”

while this strange dialogue continued, i perceived the crowd rapidly
increase. their faces expressed a mixture of curiosity and anger, which
annoyed and in some degree alarmed me. i inquired the way to the inn, but
no one replied. i then moved forward, and a murmuring sound arose from the
crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when an ill-looking man
approaching tapped me on the shoulder and said, “come, sir, you must
follow me to mr. kirwin’s to give an account of yourself.”

“who is mr. kirwin? why am i to give an account of myself? is not
this a free country?”

“ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. mr. kirwin is a magistrate,
and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was
found murdered here last night.”

this answer startled me, but i presently recovered myself. i was innocent;
that could easily be proved; accordingly i followed my conductor in silence
and was led to one of the best houses in the town. i was ready to sink from
fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by a crowd, i thought it politic
to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into
apprehension or conscious guilt. little did i then expect the calamity that
was in a few moments to overwhelm me and extinguish in horror and despair
all fear of ignominy or death.

i must pause here, for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of
the frightful events which i am about to relate, in proper detail, to my
recollection.




chapter 21


i was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old
benevolent man with calm and mild manners. he looked upon me, however,
with some degree of severity, and then, turning towards my conductors,
he asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion.

about half a dozen men came forward; and, one being selected by the
magistrate, he deposed that he had been out fishing the night before with
his son and brother-in-law, daniel nugent, when, about ten o’clock,
they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in
for port. it was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did
not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at a creek about
two miles below. he walked on first, carrying a part of the fishing tackle,
and his companions followed him at some distance. as he was proceeding
along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his
length on the ground. his companions came up to assist him, and by the
light of their lantern they found that he had fallen on the body of a man,
who was to all appearance dead. their first supposition was that it was the
corpse of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the
waves, but on examination they found that the clothes were not wet and even
that the body was not then cold. they instantly carried it to the cottage
of an old woman near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it
to life. it appeared to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty
years of age. he had apparently been strangled, for there was no sign of
any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck.

the first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, but
when the mark of the fingers was mentioned i remembered the murder of
my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a
mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for
support. the magistrate observed me with a keen eye and of course drew
an unfavourable augury from my manner.

the son confirmed his father’s account, but when daniel nugent was
called he swore positively that just before the fall of his companion, he
saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance from the shore;
and as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same
boat in which i had just landed.

a woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door
of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour
before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw a boat with
only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse
was afterwards found.

another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the
body into her house; it was not cold. they put it into a bed and
rubbed it, and daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was
quite gone.

several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed
that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it
was very probable that i had beaten about for many hours and had been
obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which i had departed.
besides, they observed that it appeared that i had brought the body
from another place, and it was likely that as i did not appear to know
the shore, i might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance
of the town of —— from the place where i had deposited the corpse.

mr. kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that i should be taken into
the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed what
effect the sight of it would produce upon me. this idea was probably
suggested by the extreme agitation i had exhibited when the mode of the
murder had been described. i was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate
and several other persons, to the inn. i could not help being struck by the
strange coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but,
knowing that i had been conversing with several persons in the island i had
inhabited about the time that the body had been found, i was perfectly
tranquil as to the consequences of the affair.

i entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin. how
can i describe my sensations on beholding it? i feel yet parched with
horror, nor can i reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and
agony. the examination, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses,
passed like a dream from my memory when i saw the lifeless form of henry
clerval stretched before me. i gasped for breath, and throwing myself on
the body, i exclaimed, “have my murderous machinations deprived you
also, my dearest henry, of life? two i have already destroyed; other
victims await their destiny; but you, clerval, my friend, my
benefactor—”

the human frame could no longer support the agonies that i endured, and
i was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.

a fever succeeded to this. i lay for two months on the point of death; my
ravings, as i afterwards heard, were frightful; i called myself the
murderer of william, of justine, and of clerval. sometimes i entreated my
attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom i was
tormented; and at others i felt the fingers of the monster already grasping
my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror. fortunately, as i spoke
my native language, mr. kirwin alone understood me; but my gestures and
bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.

why did i not die? more miserable than man ever was before, why did i not
sink into forgetfulness and rest? death snatches away many blooming
children, the only hopes of their doting parents; how many brides and
youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the
next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! of what materials was i
made that i could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of
the wheel, continually renewed the torture?

but i was doomed to live and in two months found myself as awaking from
a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by
gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of a dungeon.
it was morning, i remember, when i thus awoke to understanding; i had
forgotten the particulars of what had happened and only felt as if some
great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when i looked around
and saw the barred windows and the squalidness of the room in which i
was, all flashed across my memory and i groaned bitterly.

this sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair beside
me. she was a hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her
countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise
that class. the lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of
persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. her
tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in english,
and the voice struck me as one that i had heard during my sufferings.

“are you better now, sir?” said she.

i replied in the same language, with a feeble voice, “i believe i am;
but if it be all true, if indeed i did not dream, i am sorry that i am
still alive to feel this misery and horror.”

“for that matter,” replied the old woman, “if you mean about the
gentleman you murdered, i believe that it were better for you if you
were dead, for i fancy it will go hard with you! however, that’s none
of my business; i am sent to nurse you and get you well; i do my duty
with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.”

i turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a
speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but i felt
languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed. the whole series
of my life appeared to me as a dream; i sometimes doubted if indeed it
were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force
of reality.

as the images that floated before me became more distinct, i grew
feverish; a darkness pressed around me; no one was near me who soothed
me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. the
physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared
them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the
expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the
second. who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the
hangman who would gain his fee?

these were my first reflections, but i soon learned that mr. kirwin had
shown me extreme kindness. he had caused the best room in the prison
to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was he who
had provided a physician and a nurse. it is true, he seldom came to
see me, for although he ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of
every human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agonies and
miserable ravings of a murderer. he came, therefore, sometimes to see
that i was not neglected, but his visits were short and with long
intervals.

one day, while i was gradually recovering, i was seated in a chair, my eyes
half open and my cheeks livid like those in death. i was overcome by gloom
and misery and often reflected i had better seek death than desire to
remain in a world which to me was replete with wretchedness. at one time i
considered whether i should not declare myself guilty and suffer the
penalty of the law, less innocent than poor justine had been. such were my
thoughts when the door of my apartment was opened and mr. kirwin entered.
his countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to
mine and addressed me in french,

“i fear that this place is very shocking to you; can i do anything to
make you more comfortable?”

“i thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me; on the whole
earth there is no comfort which i am capable of receiving.”

“i know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to
one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune. but you will, i
hope, soon quit this melancholy abode, for doubtless evidence can
easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.”

“that is my least concern; i am, by a course of strange events, become
the most miserable of mortals. persecuted and tortured as i am and
have been, can death be any evil to me?”

“nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the
strange chances that have lately occurred. you were thrown, by some
surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality,
seized immediately, and charged with murder. the first sight that was
presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so
unaccountable a manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across
your path.”

as mr. kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation i endured on
this retrospect of my sufferings, i also felt considerable surprise at
the knowledge he seemed to possess concerning me. i suppose some
astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, for mr. kirwin hastened
to say,

“immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on
your person were brought me, and i examined them that i might discover some
trace by which i could send to your relations an account of your misfortune
and illness. i found several letters, and, among others, one which i
discovered from its commencement to be from your father. i instantly wrote
to geneva; nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter.
but you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any
kind.”

“this suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event;
tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder i am
now to lament?”

“your family is perfectly well,” said mr. kirwin with
gentleness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.”

i know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it
instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my
misery and taunt me with the death of clerval, as a new incitement for
me to comply with his hellish desires. i put my hand before my eyes,
and cried out in agony,

“oh! take him away! i cannot see him; for god’s sake, do not
let him enter!”

mr. kirwin regarded me with a troubled countenance. he could not help
regarding my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt and said in
rather a severe tone,

“i should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father
would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.”

“my father!” cried i, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed
from anguish to pleasure. “is my father indeed come? how kind, how
very kind! but where is he, why does he not hasten to me?”

my change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he
thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium,
and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence. he rose and
quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it.

nothing, at this moment, could have given me greater pleasure than the
arrival of my father. i stretched out my hand to him and cried,

“are you then safe—and elizabeth—and ernest?”

my father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by
dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my
desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of
cheerfulness. “what a place is this that you inhabit, my son!”
said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance
of the room. “you travelled to seek happiness, but a fatality seems
to pursue you. and poor clerval—”

the name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too
great to be endured in my weak state; i shed tears.

“alas! yes, my father,” replied i; “some destiny of the
most horrible kind hangs over me, and i must live to fulfil it, or surely i
should have died on the coffin of henry.”

we were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the
precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that
could ensure tranquillity. mr. kirwin came in and insisted that my
strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion. but the
appearance of my father was to me like that of my good angel, and i
gradually recovered my health.

as my sickness quitted me, i was absorbed by a gloomy and black
melancholy that nothing could dissipate. the image of clerval was
for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. more than once the agitation
into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous
relapse. alas! why did they preserve so miserable and detested a
life? it was surely that i might fulfil my destiny, which is now
drawing to a close. soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these
throbbings and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears
me to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, i shall also
sink to rest. then the appearance of death was distant, although the
wish was ever present to my thoughts; and i often sat for hours
motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that
might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins.

the season of the assizes approached. i had already been three months
in prison, and although i was still weak and in continual danger of a
relapse, i was obliged to travel nearly a hundred miles to the country
town where the court was held. mr. kirwin charged himself with every
care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence. i was spared
the disgrace of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the case was not
brought before the court that decides on life and death. the grand
jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that i was on the orkney
islands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and a fortnight
after my removal i was liberated from prison.

my father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations of a
criminal charge, that i was again allowed to breathe the fresh
atmosphere and permitted to return to my native country. i did not
participate in these feelings, for to me the walls of a dungeon or a
palace were alike hateful. the cup of life was poisoned for ever, and
although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, i
saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by
no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. sometimes
they were the expressive eyes of henry, languishing in death, the dark
orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed
them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as i
first saw them in my chamber at ingolstadt.

my father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection. he talked
of geneva, which i should soon visit, of elizabeth and ernest; but
these words only drew deep groans from me. sometimes, indeed, i felt a
wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved
cousin or longed, with a devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more
the blue lake and rapid rhone, that had been so dear to me in early
childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a
prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature; and
these fits were seldom interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and
despair. at these moments i often endeavoured to put an end to the
existence i loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance
to restrain me from committing some dreadful act of violence.

yet one duty remained to me, the recollection of which finally
triumphed over my selfish despair. it was necessary that i should
return without delay to geneva, there to watch over the lives of those
i so fondly loved and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any
chance led me to the place of his concealment, or if he dared again to
blast me by his presence, i might, with unfailing aim, put an end to
the existence of the monstrous image which i had endued with the
mockery of a soul still more monstrous. my father still desired to
delay our departure, fearful that i could not sustain the fatigues of a
journey, for i was a shattered wreck—the shadow of a human being. my
strength was gone. i was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day
preyed upon my wasted frame.

still, as i urged our leaving ireland with such inquietude and impatience,
my father thought it best to yield. we took our passage on board a vessel
bound for havre-de-grace and sailed with a fair wind from the irish shores.
it was midnight. i lay on the deck looking at the stars and listening to
the dashing of the waves. i hailed the darkness that shut ireland from my
sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish joy when i reflected that i should
soon see geneva. the past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream;
yet the vessel in which i was, the wind that blew me from the detested
shore of ireland, and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly
that i was deceived by no vision and that clerval, my friend and dearest
companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation. i
repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while residing
with my family in geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for
ingolstadt. i remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on
to the creation of my hideous enemy, and i called to mind the night in
which he first lived. i was unable to pursue the train of thought; a
thousand feelings pressed upon me, and i wept bitterly.

ever since my recovery from the fever, i had been in the custom of taking
every night a small quantity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug
only that i was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of
life. oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes, i now
swallowed double my usual quantity and soon slept profoundly. but sleep did
not afford me respite from thought and misery; my dreams presented a
thousand objects that scared me. towards morning i was possessed by a kind
of nightmare; i felt the fiend’s grasp in my neck and could not free
myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears. my father, who was
watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves
were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of
security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour
and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a kind of calm
forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly
susceptible.




chapter 22


the voyage came to an end. we landed, and proceeded to paris. i soon
found that i had overtaxed my strength and that i must repose before i
could continue my journey. my father’s care and attentions were
indefatigable, but he did not know the origin of my sufferings and
sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. he wished me to
seek amusement in society. i abhorred the face of man. oh, not
abhorred! they were my brethren, my fellow beings, and i felt
attracted even to the most repulsive among them, as to creatures of an
angelic nature and celestial mechanism. but i felt that i had no right
to share their intercourse. i had unchained an enemy among them whose
joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans. how they
would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the world, did they know
my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me!

my father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by
various arguments to banish my despair. sometimes he thought that i
felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of
murder, and he endeavoured to prove to me the futility of pride.

“alas! my father,” said i, “how little do you know me. 
human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded if such
a wretch as i felt pride. justine, poor unhappy justine, was as innocent
as i, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and i am the cause
of this—i murdered her. william, justine, and henry—they all
died by my hands.”

my father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same
assertion; when i thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an
explanation, and at others he appeared to consider it as the offspring of
delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented
itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which i preserved in my
convalescence. i avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence
concerning the wretch i had created. i had a persuasion that i should be
supposed mad, and this in itself would for ever have chained my tongue. but,
besides, i could not bring myself to disclose a secret which would fill my
hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of
his breast. i checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was
silent when i would have given the world to have confided the fatal secret.
yet, still, words like those i have recorded would burst uncontrollably
from me. i could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part
relieved the burden of my mysterious woe.

upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder,
“my dearest victor, what infatuation is this? my dear son, i entreat
you never to make such an assertion again.”

“i am not mad,” i cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who
have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. i am the
assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations.
a thousand times would i have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have
saved their lives; but i could not, my father, indeed i could not
sacrifice the whole human race.”

the conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were
deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our conversation and
endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. he wished as much as
possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in
ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my
misfortunes.

as time passed away i became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my
heart, but i no longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my own
crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness of them. by the utmost
self-violence i curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which
sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners
were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey
to the sea of ice.

a few days before we left paris on our way to switzerland, i received the
following letter from elizabeth:

“my dear friend,

“it gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle
dated at paris; you are no longer at a formidable distance, and i may
hope to see you in less than a fortnight. my poor cousin, how much you
must have suffered! i expect to see you looking even more ill than
when you quitted geneva. this winter has been passed most miserably,
tortured as i have been by anxious suspense; yet i hope to see peace in
your countenance and to find that your heart is not totally void of
comfort and tranquillity.

“yet i fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable
a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. i would not disturb you at
this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a
conversation that i had with my uncle previous to his departure renders
some explanation necessary before we meet.

explanation! you may possibly say, what can elizabeth have to explain? if
you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts satisfied.
but you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet
be pleased with this explanation; and in a probability of this being the
case, i dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, i
have often wished to express to you but have never had the courage to begin.

“you well know, victor, that our union had been the favourite plan of
your parents ever since our infancy. we were told this when young, and
taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take
place. we were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, i
believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older. but
as brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards each
other without desiring a more intimate union, may not such also be our
case? tell me, dearest victor. answer me, i conjure you by our mutual
happiness, with simple truth—do you not love another?

“you have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at
ingolstadt; and i confess to you, my friend, that when i saw you last
autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every
creature, i could not help supposing that you might regret our
connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of
your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations.
but this is false reasoning. i confess to you, my friend, that i love
you and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been my constant
friend and companion. but it is your happiness i desire as well as my
own when i declare to you that our marriage would render me eternally
miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. even now
i weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest
misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that
love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. i, who
have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your miseries
tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes. ah! victor, be assured
that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you not to be
made miserable by this supposition. be happy, my friend; and if you
obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth
will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.

“do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the
next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. my uncle
will send me news of your health, and if i see but one smile on your
lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, i
shall need no other happiness.

“elizabeth lavenza.



“geneva, may 18th, 17—”



this letter revived in my memory what i had before forgotten, the threat of
the fiend—“_i will be with you on your
wedding-night!_” such was my sentence, and on that night would the
dæmon employ every art to destroy me and tear me from the glimpse of
happiness which promised partly to console my sufferings. on that night he
had determined to consummate his crimes by my death. well, be it so; a
deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which if he were
victorious i should be at peace and his power over me be at an end. if he
were vanquished, i should be a free man. alas! what freedom? such as the
peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his eyes, his
cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless,
penniless, and alone, but free. such would be my liberty except that in my
elizabeth i possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of
remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death.

sweet and beloved elizabeth! i read and reread her letter, and some
softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal
dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the
angel’s arm bared to drive me from all hope. yet i would die to make
her happy. if the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet,
again, i considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. my
destruction might indeed arrive a few months sooner, but if my torturer
should suspect that i postponed it, influenced by his menaces, he would
surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. he had vowed
_to be with me on my wedding-night_, yet he did not consider that
threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show me that
he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered clerval immediately
after the enunciation of his threats. i resolved, therefore, that if my
immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my
father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life
should not retard it a single hour.

in this state of mind i wrote to elizabeth. my letter was calm and
affectionate. “i fear, my beloved girl,” i said, “little happiness
remains for us on earth; yet all that i may one day enjoy is centred in
you. chase away your idle fears; to you alone do i consecrate my life
and my endeavours for contentment. i have one secret, elizabeth, a
dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with
horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only
wonder that i survive what i have endured. i will confide this tale of
misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place,
for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us. but
until then, i conjure you, do not mention or allude to it. this i most
earnestly entreat, and i know you will comply.”

in about a week after the arrival of elizabeth’s letter we returned
to geneva. the sweet girl welcomed me with warm affection, yet tears were
in her eyes as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. i saw a
change in her also. she was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly
vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of
compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as i
was.

the tranquillity which i now enjoyed did not endure. memory brought madness
with it, and when i thought of what had passed, a real insanity possessed
me; sometimes i was furious and burnt with rage, sometimes low and
despondent. i neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat motionless,
bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.

elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle voice
would soothe me when transported by passion and inspire me with human
feelings when sunk in torpor. she wept with me and for me. when reason
returned, she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire me with
resignation. ah! it is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the
guilty there is no peace. the agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is
otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief.

soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with
elizabeth. i remained silent.

“have you, then, some other attachment?”

“none on earth. i love elizabeth and look forward to our union with
delight. let the day therefore be fixed; and on it i will consecrate
myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin.”

“my dear victor, do not speak thus. heavy misfortunes have befallen
us, but let us only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love
for those whom we have lost to those who yet live. our circle will be
small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune.
and when time shall have softened your despair, new and dear objects of
care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly
deprived.”

such were the lessons of my father. but to me the remembrance of the
threat returned; nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had
yet been in his deeds of blood, i should almost regard him as
invincible, and that when he had pronounced the words “_i shall be with
you on your wedding-night_,” i should regard the threatened fate as
unavoidable. but death was no evil to me if the loss of elizabeth were
balanced with it, and i therefore, with a contented and even cheerful
countenance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would consent, the
ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as i imagined,
the seal to my fate.

great god! if for one instant i had thought what might be the hellish
intention of my fiendish adversary, i would rather have banished myself
for ever from my native country and wandered a friendless outcast over
the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage. but, as if
possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded me to his real
intentions; and when i thought that i had prepared only my own death, i
hastened that of a far dearer victim.

as the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or
a prophetic feeling, i felt my heart sink within me. but i concealed my
feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the
countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer
eye of elizabeth. she looked forward to our union with placid contentment,
not unmingled with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed,
that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate
into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret.

preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received,
and all wore a smiling appearance. i shut up, as well as i could, in my own
heart the anxiety that preyed there and entered with seeming earnestness
into the plans of my father, although they might only serve as the
decorations of my tragedy. through my father’s exertions a part of
the inheritance of elizabeth had been restored to her by the austrian
government. a small possession on the shores of como belonged to her. it
was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to villa
lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake
near which it stood.

in the meantime i took every precaution to defend my person in case the
fiend should openly attack me. i carried pistols and a dagger
constantly about me and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and
by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity. indeed, as the
period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be
regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness i hoped for
in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as the day fixed
for its solemnisation drew nearer and i heard it continually spoken of
as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent.

elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to
calm her mind. but on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my
destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her;
and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret which i had
promised to reveal to her on the following day. my father was in the
meantime overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in
the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride.

after the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my
father’s, but it was agreed that elizabeth and i should commence our
journey by water, sleeping that night at evian and continuing our
voyage on the following day. the day was fair, the wind favourable;
all smiled on our nuptial embarkation.

those were the last moments of my life during which i enjoyed the
feeling of happiness. we passed rapidly along; the sun was hot, but we
were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the
beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw
mont salêve, the pleasant banks of montalègre, and at a distance,
surmounting all, the beautiful mont blanc, and the assemblage of snowy
mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the
opposite banks, we saw the mighty jura opposing its dark side to the
ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost
insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it.

i took the hand of elizabeth. “you are sorrowful, my love. ah! if
you knew what i have suffered and what i may yet endure, you would
endeavour to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this
one day at least permits me to enjoy.”

“be happy, my dear victor,” replied elizabeth; “there is, i hope,
nothing to distress you; and be assured that if a lively joy is not
painted in my face, my heart is contented. something whispers to me
not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but i
will not listen to such a sinister voice. observe how fast we move
along and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise
above the dome of mont blanc, render this scene of beauty still more
interesting. look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in
the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at
the bottom. what a divine day! how happy and serene all nature
appears!”

thus elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all
reflection upon melancholy subjects. but her temper was fluctuating;
joy for a few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place
to distraction and reverie.

the sun sank lower in the heavens; we passed the river drance and
observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the
lower hills. the alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached
the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. the
spire of evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range
of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung.

the wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity,
sank at sunset to a light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the water
and caused a pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the
shore, from which it wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and
hay. the sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as i touched
the shore i felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp
me and cling to me for ever.




chapter 23


it was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short time on the
shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and
contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured
in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines.

the wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence
in the west. the moon had reached her summit in the heavens and was
beginning to descend; the clouds swept across it swifter than the
flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the
scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves
that were beginning to rise. suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended.

i had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscured the
shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind. i was anxious
and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in
my bosom; every sound terrified me, but i resolved that i would sell my
life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that
of my adversary was extinguished.

elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence,
but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and
trembling, she asked, “what is it that agitates you, my dear victor?
what is it you fear?”

“oh! peace, peace, my love,” replied i; “this night, and
all will be safe; but this night is dreadful, very dreadful.”

i passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly i reflected how
fearful the combat which i momentarily expected would be to my wife,
and i earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her
until i had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.

she left me, and i continued some time walking up and down the passages
of the house and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to
my adversary. but i discovered no trace of him and was beginning to
conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the
execution of his menaces when suddenly i heard a shrill and dreadful
scream. it came from the room into which elizabeth had retired. as i
heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the
motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; i could feel the blood
trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. this
state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and i rushed
into the room.

great god! why did i not then expire! why am i here to relate the
destruction of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? she was
there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down
and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. everywhere i
turn i see the same figure—her bloodless arms and relaxed form flung
by the murderer on its bridal bier. could i behold this and live? alas!
life is obstinate and clings closest where it is most hated. for a moment
only did i lose recollection; i fell senseless on the ground.

when i recovered i found myself surrounded by the people of the inn; their
countenances expressed a breathless terror, but the horror of others
appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. i
escaped from them to the room where lay the body of elizabeth, my love, my
wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy. she had been moved from the
posture in which i had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon
her arm and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, i might have
supposed her asleep. i rushed towards her and embraced her with ardour, but
the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told me that what i now held
in my arms had ceased to be the elizabeth whom i had loved and cherished.
the murderous mark of the fiend’s grasp was on her neck, and the
breath had ceased to issue from her lips.

while i still hung over her in the agony of despair, i happened to look up.
the windows of the room had before been darkened, and i felt a kind of
panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber.
the shutters had been thrown back, and with a sensation of horror not to be
described, i saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred.
a grin was on the face of the monster; he seemed to jeer, as with his
fiendish finger he pointed towards the corpse of my wife. i rushed towards
the window, and drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded me,
leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning,
plunged into the lake.

the report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. i pointed to
the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with
boats; nets were cast, but in vain. after passing several hours, we
returned hopeless, most of my companions believing it to have been a
form conjured up by my fancy. after having landed, they proceeded to
search the country, parties going in different directions among the
woods and vines.

i attempted to accompany them and proceeded a short distance from the
house, but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of a drunken
man, i fell at last in a state of utter exhaustion; a film covered my
eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever. in this state i
was carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what had
happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to seek something that
i had lost.

after an interval i arose, and as if by instinct, crawled into the room
where the corpse of my beloved lay. there were women weeping around; i
hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs; all this time no
distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to
various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their
cause. i was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and horror. the death
of william, the execution of justine, the murder of clerval, and lastly
of my wife; even at that moment i knew not that my only remaining
friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now
might be writhing under his grasp, and ernest might be dead at his
feet. this idea made me shudder and recalled me to action. i started
up and resolved to return to geneva with all possible speed.

there were no horses to be procured, and i must return by the lake; but the
wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. however, it was
hardly morning, and i might reasonably hope to arrive by night. i hired men
to row and took an oar myself, for i had always experienced relief from
mental torment in bodily exercise. but the overflowing misery i now felt,
and the excess of agitation that i endured rendered me incapable of any
exertion. i threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way
to every gloomy idea that arose. if i looked up, i saw scenes which were
familiar to me in my happier time and which i had contemplated but the day
before in the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection.
tears streamed from my eyes. the rain had ceased for a moment, and i saw
the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hours before; they had
then been observed by elizabeth. nothing is so painful to the human mind as
a great and sudden change. the sun might shine or the clouds might lower,
but nothing could appear to me as it had done the day before. a fiend had
snatched from me every hope of future happiness; no creature had ever been
so miserable as i was; so frightful an event is single in the history of
man.

but why should i dwell upon the incidents that followed this last
overwhelming event? mine has been a tale of horrors; i have reached their
_acme_, and what i must now relate can but be tedious to you. know
that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; i was left desolate. my
own strength is exhausted, and i must tell, in a few words, what remains of
my hideous narration.

i arrived at geneva. my father and ernest yet lived, but the former sunk
under the tidings that i bore. i see him now, excellent and venerable old
man! his eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their
delight—his elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with
all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life, having
few affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain. cursed, cursed
be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste
in wretchedness! he could not live under the horrors that were accumulated
around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to
rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms.

what then became of me? i know not; i lost sensation, and chains and
darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. sometimes,
indeed, i dreamt that i wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales
with the friends of my youth, but i awoke and found myself in a
dungeon. melancholy followed, but by degrees i gained a clear
conception of my miseries and situation and was then released from my
prison. for they had called me mad, and during many months, as i
understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation.

liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had i not, as i
awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge. as the
memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, i began to reflect on their
cause—the monster whom i had created, the miserable dæmon whom i had
sent abroad into the world for my destruction. i was possessed by a
maddening rage when i thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed
that i might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal
revenge on his cursed head.

nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; i began to
reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about
a month after my release, i repaired to a criminal judge in the town
and told him that i had an accusation to make, that i knew the
destroyer of my family, and that i required him to exert his whole
authority for the apprehension of the murderer.

the magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “be
assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall
be spared to discover the villain.”

“i thank you,” replied i; “listen, therefore, to the
deposition that i have to make. it is indeed a tale so strange that i
should fear you would not credit it were there not something in truth
which, however wonderful, forces conviction. the story is too connected to
be mistaken for a dream, and i have no motive for falsehood.” my
manner as i thus addressed him was impressive but calm; i had formed in my
own heart a resolution to pursue my destroyer to death, and this purpose
quieted my agony and for an interval reconciled me to life. i now related
my history briefly but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with
accuracy and never deviating into invective or exclamation.

the magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as i continued
he became more attentive and interested; i saw him sometimes shudder with
horror; at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted
on his countenance.

when i had concluded my narration, i said, “this is the being whom i
accuse and for whose seizure and punishment i call upon you to exert your
whole power. it is your duty as a magistrate, and i believe and hope that
your feelings as a man will not revolt from the execution of those
functions on this occasion.”

this address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own
auditor. he had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given
to a tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when he was called upon
to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity
returned. he, however, answered mildly, “i would willingly afford you
every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to
have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance. who can follow an
animal which can traverse the sea of ice and inhabit caves and dens where
no man would venture to intrude? besides, some months have elapsed since
the commission of his crimes, and no one can conjecture to what place he
has wandered or what region he may now inhabit.”

“i do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which i inhabit, and if
he has indeed taken refuge in the alps, he may be hunted like the chamois
and destroyed as a beast of prey. but i perceive your thoughts; you do not
credit my narrative and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the
punishment which is his desert.”

as i spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated.
“you are mistaken,” said he. “i will exert myself, and if
it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer
punishment proportionate to his crimes. but i fear, from what you have
yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove
impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should
make up your mind to disappointment.”

“that cannot be; but all that i can say will be of little avail. my
revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while i allow it to be a vice, i
confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul. my rage
is unspeakable when i reflect that the murderer, whom i have turned
loose upon society, still exists. you refuse my just demand; i have
but one resource, and i devote myself, either in my life or death, to
his destruction.”

i trembled with excess of agitation as i said this; there was a frenzy
in my manner, and something, i doubt not, of that haughty fierceness
which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed. but to a genevan
magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of
devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of
madness. he endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse does a child and
reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.

“man,” i cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of
wisdom! cease; you know not what it is you say.”

i broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on
some other mode of action.




chapter 24


my present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was
swallowed up and lost. i was hurried away by fury; revenge alone
endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and
allowed me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise
delirium or death would have been my portion.

my first resolution was to quit geneva for ever; my country, which, when i
was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, became
hateful. i provided myself with a sum of money, together with a few jewels
which had belonged to my mother, and departed.

and now my wanderings began which are to cease but with life. i have
traversed a vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships
which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. how i
have lived i hardly know; many times have i stretched my failing limbs upon
the sandy plain and prayed for death. but revenge kept me alive; i dared
not die and leave my adversary in being.

when i quitted geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which i
might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy. but my plan was unsettled,
and i wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain
what path i should pursue. as night approached i found myself at the
entrance of the cemetery where william, elizabeth, and my father
reposed. i entered it and approached the tomb which marked their
graves. everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, which
were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark, and the
scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested
observer. the spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to
cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the
mourner.

the deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to
rage and despair. they were dead, and i lived; their murderer also lived,
and to destroy him i must drag out my weary existence. i knelt on the grass
and kissed the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “by the
sacred earth on which i kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the
deep and eternal grief that i feel, i swear; and by thee, o night, and the
spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the dæmon who caused this misery,
until he or i shall perish in mortal conflict. for this purpose i will
preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will i again behold the sun
and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my
eyes for ever. and i call on you, spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering
ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my work. let the cursed
and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now
torments me.”

i had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me
that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but
the furies possessed me as i concluded, and rage choked my utterance.

i was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish
laugh. it rang on my ears long and heavily; the mountains re-echoed
it, and i felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and laughter.
surely in that moment i should have been possessed by frenzy and have
destroyed my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and that i
was reserved for vengeance. the laughter died away, when a well-known
and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in an
audible whisper, “i am satisfied, miserable wretch! you have
determined to live, and i am satisfied.”

i darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil
eluded my grasp. suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone
full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than
mortal speed.

i pursued him, and for many months this has been my task. guided by a
slight clue, i followed the windings of the rhone, but vainly. the
blue mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, i saw the fiend
enter by night and hide himself in a vessel bound for the black sea. i
took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, i know not how.

amidst the wilds of tartary and russia, although he still evaded me, i
have ever followed in his track. sometimes the peasants, scared by
this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself,
who feared that if i lost all trace of him i should despair and die,
left some mark to guide me. the snows descended on my head, and i saw
the print of his huge step on the white plain. to you first entering
on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand
what i have felt and still feel? cold, want, and fatigue were the
least pains which i was destined to endure; i was cursed by some devil
and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good
followed and directed my steps and when i most murmured would suddenly
extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. sometimes,
when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast
was prepared for me in the desert that restored and inspirited me. the
fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but
i will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that i had
invoked to aid me. often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and
i was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the
few drops that revived me, and vanish.

i followed, when i could, the courses of the rivers; but the dæmon
generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the
country chiefly collected. in other places human beings were seldom
seen, and i generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my
path. i had money with me and gained the friendship of the villagers
by distributing it; or i brought with me some food that i had killed,
which, after taking a small part, i always presented to those who had
provided me with fire and utensils for cooking.

my life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during
sleep alone that i could taste joy. o blessed sleep! often, when most
miserable, i sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me even to rapture. the
spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of
happiness that i might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. deprived of
this respite, i should have sunk under my hardships. during the day i was
sustained and inspirited by the hope of night, for in sleep i saw my
friends, my wife, and my beloved country; again i saw the benevolent
countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my elizabeth’s
voice, and beheld clerval enjoying health and youth. often, when wearied by
a toilsome march, i persuaded myself that i was dreaming until night should
come and that i should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest
friends. what agonising fondness did i feel for them! how did i cling to
their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and
persuade myself that they still lived! at such moments vengeance, that
burned within me, died in my heart, and i pursued my path towards the
destruction of the dæmon more as a task enjoined by heaven, as the
mechanical impulse of some power of which i was unconscious, than as the
ardent desire of my soul.

what his feelings were whom i pursued i cannot know. sometimes, indeed, he
left marks in writing on the barks of the trees or cut in stone that guided
me and instigated my fury. “my reign is not yet
over”—these words were legible in one of these
inscriptions—“you live, and my power is complete. follow me; i
seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of
cold and frost, to which i am impassive. you will find near this place, if
you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. come on, my
enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable
hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.”

scoffing devil! again do i vow vengeance; again do i devote thee,
miserable fiend, to torture and death. never will i give up my search
until he or i perish; and then with what ecstasy shall i join my
elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for me the
reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage!

as i still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the
cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support. the peasants were
shut up in their hovels, and only a few of the most hardy ventured forth to
seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to
seek for prey. the rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be
procured; and thus i was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.

the triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours. one
inscription that he left was in these words: “prepare! your toils
only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter
upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting
hatred.”

my courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; i
resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on heaven to support
me, i continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts,
until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary
of the horizon. oh! how unlike it was to the blue seasons of the
south! covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by
its superior wildness and ruggedness. the greeks wept for joy when
they beheld the mediterranean from the hills of asia, and hailed with
rapture the boundary of their toils. i did not weep, but i knelt down
and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in
safety to the place where i hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe,
to meet and grapple with him.

some weeks before this period i had procured a sledge and dogs and thus
traversed the snows with inconceivable speed. i know not whether the
fiend possessed the same advantages, but i found that, as before i had
daily lost ground in the pursuit, i now gained on him, so much so that
when i first saw the ocean he was but one day’s journey in advance, and
i hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach. with new
courage, therefore, i pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched
hamlet on the seashore. i inquired of the inhabitants concerning the
fiend and gained accurate information. a gigantic monster, they said,
had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols,
putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of
his terrific appearance. he had carried off their store of winter
food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a
numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same
night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his
journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land; and they
conjectured that he must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the
ice or frozen by the eternal frosts.

on hearing this information i suffered a temporary access of despair.
he had escaped me, and i must commence a destructive and almost endless
journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few
of the inhabitants could long endure and which i, the native of a
genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. yet at the idea
that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance
returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling.
after a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered
round and instigated me to toil and revenge, i prepared for my journey.

i exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of
the frozen ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, i
departed from land.

i cannot guess how many days have passed since then, but i have endured
misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution
burning within my heart could have enabled me to support. immense and
rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and i often heard
the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. but
again the frost came and made the paths of the sea secure.

by the quantity of provision which i had consumed, i should guess that
i had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction
of hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drops of
despondency and grief from my eyes. despair had indeed almost secured
her prey, and i should soon have sunk beneath this misery. once, after
the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the
summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his fatigue,
died, i viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye
caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. i strained my sight to
discover what it could be and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when i
distinguished a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known
form within. oh! with what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart!
warm tears filled my eyes, which i hastily wiped away, that they might
not intercept the view i had of the dæmon; but still my sight was
dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that
oppressed me, i wept aloud.

but this was not the time for delay; i disencumbered the dogs of their
dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food, and after an
hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly
irksome to me, i continued my route. the sledge was still visible, nor
did i again lose sight of it except at the moments when for a short
time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags. i indeed
perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, i
beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant, my heart bounded within
me.

but now, when i appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were
suddenly extinguished, and i lost all trace of him more utterly than i had
ever done before. a ground sea was heard; the thunder of its progress, as
the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more ominous
and terrific. i pressed on, but in vain. the wind arose; the sea roared;
and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a
tremendous and overwhelming sound. the work was soon finished; in a few
minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my enemy, and i was left
drifting on a scattered piece of ice that was continually lessening and
thus preparing for me a hideous death.

in this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and i
myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when i saw your
vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life.
i had no conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded
at the sight. i quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars, and
by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in
the direction of your ship. i had determined, if you were going southwards,
still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my
purpose. i hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with which i could pursue
my enemy. but your direction was northwards. you took me on board when my
vigour was exhausted, and i should soon have sunk under my multiplied
hardships into a death which i still dread, for my task is unfulfilled.

oh! when will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the dæmon, allow
me the rest i so much desire; or must i die, and he yet live? if i do,
swear to me, walton, that he shall not escape, that you will seek him
and satisfy my vengeance in his death. and do i dare to ask of you to
undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that i have undergone?
no; i am not so selfish. yet, when i am dead, if he should appear, if
the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he
shall not live—swear that he shall not triumph over my accumulated
woes and survive to add to the list of his dark crimes. he is eloquent
and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but
trust him not. his soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery
and fiend-like malice. hear him not; call on the names of william,
justine, clerval, elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched victor, and
thrust your sword into his heart. i will hover near and direct the
steel aright.

walton, _in continuation._


august 26th, 17—.


you have read this strange and terrific story, margaret; and do you not
feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdles
mine? sometimes, seized with sudden agony, he could not continue his
tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with
difficulty the words so replete with anguish. his fine and lovely eyes
were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow
and quenched in infinite wretchedness. sometimes he commanded his
countenance and tones and related the most horrible incidents with a
tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a
volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression
of the wildest rage as he shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.

his tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest truth,
yet i own to you that the letters of felix and safie, which he showed me,
and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a
greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations,
however earnest and connected. such a monster has, then, really existence!
i cannot doubt it, yet i am lost in surprise and admiration. sometimes i
endeavoured to gain from frankenstein the particulars of his
creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable.

“are you mad, my friend?” said he. “or whither does your
senseless curiosity lead you? would you also create for yourself and the
world a demoniacal enemy? peace, peace! learn my miseries and do not seek
to increase your own.”

frankenstein discovered that i made notes concerning his history; he asked
to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places,
but principally in giving the life and spirit to the conversations he held
with his enemy. “since you have preserved my narration,” said
he, “i would not that a mutilated one should go down to
posterity.”

thus has a week passed away, while i have listened to the strangest
tale that ever imagination formed. my thoughts and every feeling of my
soul have been drunk up by the interest for my guest which this tale
and his own elevated and gentle manners have created. i wish to soothe
him, yet can i counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of
every hope of consolation, to live? oh, no! the only joy that he can
now know will be when he composes his shattered spirit to peace and
death. yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and
delirium; he believes that when in dreams he holds converse with his
friends and derives from that communion consolation for his miseries or
excitements to his vengeance, that they are not the creations of his
fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from the regions of a
remote world. this faith gives a solemnity to his reveries that render
them to me almost as imposing and interesting as truth.

our conversations are not always confined to his own history and
misfortunes. on every point of general literature he displays
unbounded knowledge and a quick and piercing apprehension. his
eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can i hear him, when he relates
a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love,
without tears. what a glorious creature must he have been in the days
of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin! he seems
to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.

“when younger,” said he, “i believed myself destined for
some great enterprise. my feelings are profound, but i possessed a coolness
of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements. this sentiment of
the worth of my nature supported me when others would have been oppressed,
for i deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those talents that
might be useful to my fellow creatures. when i reflected on the work i had
completed, no less a one than the creation of a sensitive and rational
animal, i could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. but
this thought, which supported me in the commencement of my career, now
serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. all my speculations and hopes
are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, i am
chained in an eternal hell. my imagination was vivid, yet my powers of
analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities i
conceived the idea and executed the creation of a man. even now i cannot
recollect without passion my reveries while the work was incomplete. i trod
heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea
of their effects. from my infancy i was imbued with high hopes and a lofty
ambition; but how am i sunk! oh! my friend, if you had known me as i once
was, you would not recognise me in this state of degradation. despondency
rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until i fell,
never, never again to rise.”

must i then lose this admirable being? i have longed for a friend; i have
sought one who would sympathise with and love me. behold, on these desert
seas i have found such a one, but i fear i have gained him only to know his
value and lose him. i would reconcile him to life, but he repulses the idea.

“i thank you, walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so
miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh
affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? can any
man be to me as clerval was, or any woman another elizabeth? even
where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence,
the companions of our childhood always possess a certain power over our
minds which hardly any later friend can obtain. they know our
infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified,
are never eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more
certain conclusions as to the integrity of our motives. a sister or a
brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early,
suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend,
however strongly he may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be
contemplated with suspicion. but i enjoyed friends, dear not only
through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever
i am, the soothing voice of my elizabeth and the conversation of
clerval will be ever whispered in my ear. they are dead, and but one
feeling in such a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life. if i
were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive
utility to my fellow creatures, then could i live to fulfil it. but
such is not my destiny; i must pursue and destroy the being to whom i
gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and i may die.”

my beloved sister,

september 2d.


i write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether i am ever
doomed to see again dear england and the dearer friends that inhabit
it. i am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of no escape and
threaten every moment to crush my vessel. the brave fellows whom i
have persuaded to be my companions look towards me for aid, but i have
none to bestow. there is something terribly appalling in our
situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. yet it is
terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men are endangered
through me. if we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.

and what, margaret, will be the state of your mind? you will not hear of my
destruction, and you will anxiously await my return. years will pass, and
you will have visitings of despair and yet be tortured by hope. oh! my
beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is,
in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. but you have a husband
and lovely children; you may be happy. heaven bless you and make you so!

my unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. he
endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession
which he valued. he reminds me how often the same accidents have
happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite
of myself, he fills me with cheerful auguries. even the sailors feel
the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they no longer despair; he
rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice they believe these
vast mountains of ice are mole-hills which will vanish before the
resolutions of man. these feelings are transitory; each day of
expectation delayed fills them with fear, and i almost dread a mutiny
caused by this despair.

september 5th.


a scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is
highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet i cannot
forbear recording it.

we are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger
of being crushed in their conflict. the cold is excessive, and many of
my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of
desolation. frankenstein has daily declined in health; a feverish fire
still glimmers in his eyes, but he is exhausted, and when suddenly
roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent
lifelessness.

i mentioned in my last letter the fears i entertained of a mutiny.
this morning, as i sat watching the wan countenance of my friend—his
eyes half closed and his limbs hanging listlessly—i was roused by half
a dozen of the sailors, who demanded admission into the cabin. they
entered, and their leader addressed me. he told me that he and his
companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come in deputation
to me to make me a requisition which, in justice, i could not refuse.
we were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they
feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and a free
passage be opened, i should be rash enough to continue my voyage and
lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted
this. they insisted, therefore, that i should engage with a solemn
promise that if the vessel should be freed i would instantly direct my
course southwards.

this speech troubled me. i had not despaired, nor had i yet conceived
the idea of returning if set free. yet could i, in justice, or even in
possibility, refuse this demand? i hesitated before i answered, when
frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly
to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled,
and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. turning towards the men,
he said,

“what do you mean? what do you demand of your captain? are you, then,
so easily turned from your design? did you not call this a glorious
expedition? “and wherefore was it glorious? not because the way was
smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was full of dangers and
terror, because at every new incident your fortitude was to be called forth
and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and
these you were to brave and overcome. for this was it a glorious, for this
was it an honourable undertaking. you were hereafter to be hailed as the
benefactors of your species, your names adored as belonging to brave men
who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind. and now,
behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first
mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you shrink away and are content
to be handed down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and
peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm
firesides. why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come
thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat merely to prove
yourselves cowards. oh! be men, or be more than men. be steady to your
purposes and firm as a rock. this ice is not made of such stuff as your
hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it
shall not. do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace
marked on your brows. return as heroes who have fought and conquered and
who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe.”

he spoke this with a voice so modulated to the different feelings expressed
in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and heroism, that can
you wonder that these men were moved? they looked at one another and were
unable to reply. i spoke; i told them to retire and consider of what had
been said, that i would not lead them farther north if they strenuously
desired the contrary, but that i hoped that, with reflection, their courage
would return.

they retired and i turned towards my friend, but he was sunk in languor and
almost deprived of life.

how all this will terminate, i know not, but i had rather die than
return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. yet i fear such will be my
fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never
willingly continue to endure their present hardships.

september 7th.


the die is cast; i have consented to return if we are not destroyed.
thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; i come back
ignorant and disappointed. it requires more philosophy than i possess
to bear this injustice with patience.

september 12th.


it is past; i am returning to england. i have lost my hopes of utility
and glory; i have lost my friend. but i will endeavour to detail these
bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while i am wafted
towards england and towards you, i will not despond.

september 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard
at a distance as the islands split and cracked in every direction. we were
in the most imminent peril, but as we could only remain passive, my chief
attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest whose illness increased in
such a degree that he was entirely confined to his bed. the ice cracked
behind us and was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from
the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly
free. when the sailors saw this and that their return to their native
country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them,
loud and long-continued. frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the
cause of the tumult. “they shout,” i said, “because they
will soon return to england.”

“do you, then, really return?”

“alas! yes; i cannot withstand their demands. i cannot lead them
unwillingly to danger, and i must return.”

“do so, if you will; but i will not. you may give up your purpose, but
mine is assigned to me by heaven, and i dare not. i am weak, but
surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with
sufficient strength.” saying this, he endeavoured to spring from the
bed, but the exertion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted.

it was long before he was restored, and i often thought that life was
entirely extinct. at length he opened his eyes; he breathed with
difficulty and was unable to speak. the surgeon gave him a composing
draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. in the meantime he
told me that my friend had certainly not many hours to live.

his sentence was pronounced, and i could only grieve and be patient. i sat
by his bed, watching him; his eyes were closed, and i thought he slept; but
presently he called to me in a feeble voice, and bidding me come near,
said, “alas! the strength i relied on is gone; i feel that i shall
soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. think
not, walton, that in the last moments of my existence i feel that burning
hatred and ardent desire of revenge i once expressed; but i feel myself
justified in desiring the death of my adversary. during these last days i
have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do i find it blamable.
in a fit of enthusiastic madness i created a rational creature and was
bound towards him to assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and
well-being. this was my duty, but there was another still paramount to
that. my duties towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to
my attention because they included a greater proportion of happiness or
misery. urged by this view, i refused, and i did right in refusing, to
create a companion for the first creature. he showed unparalleled malignity
and selfishness in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction
beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do i
know where this thirst for vengeance may end. miserable himself that he may
render no other wretched, he ought to die. the task of his destruction was
mine, but i have failed. when actuated by selfish and vicious motives, i
asked you to undertake my unfinished work, and i renew this request now,
when i am only induced by reason and virtue.

“yet i cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends to fulfil
this task; and now that you are returning to england, you will have
little chance of meeting with him. but the consideration of these
points, and the well balancing of what you may esteem your duties, i
leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the near
approach of death. i dare not ask you to do what i think right, for i
may still be misled by passion.

“that he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in
other respects, this hour, when i momentarily expect my release, is the
only happy one which i have enjoyed for several years. the forms of
the beloved dead flit before me, and i hasten to their arms. farewell,
walton! seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition, even if it
be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in
science and discoveries. yet why do i say this? i have myself been
blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.”

his voice became fainter as he spoke, and at length, exhausted by his
effort, he sank into silence. about half an hour afterwards he
attempted again to speak but was unable; he pressed my hand feebly, and
his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed
away from his lips.

margaret, what comment can i make on the untimely extinction of this
glorious spirit? what can i say that will enable you to understand the
depth of my sorrow? all that i should express would be inadequate and
feeble. my tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by a cloud of
disappointment. but i journey towards england, and i may there find
consolation.

i am interrupted. what do these sounds portend? it is midnight; the
breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. again there
is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin
where the remains of frankenstein still lie. i must arise and examine.
good night, my sister.

great god! what a scene has just taken place! i am yet dizzy with the
remembrance of it. i hardly know whether i shall have the power to detail
it; yet the tale which i have recorded would be incomplete without this
final and wonderful catastrophe.

i entered the cabin where lay the remains of my ill-fated and admirable
friend. over him hung a form which i cannot find words to
describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its
proportions. as he hung over the coffin, his face was concealed by long
locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and
apparent texture like that of a mummy. when he heard the sound of my
approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung
towards the window. never did i behold a vision so horrible as his face, of
such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. i shut my eyes involuntarily and
endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer.
i called on him to stay.

he paused, looking on me with wonder, and again turning towards the
lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence, and
every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some
uncontrollable passion.

“that is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “in his murder my
crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its
close! oh, frankenstein! generous and self-devoted being! what does it
avail that i now ask thee to pardon me? i, who irretrievably destroyed thee
by destroying all thou lovedst. alas! he is cold, he cannot answer
me.”

his voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses, which had suggested to
me the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend in destroying his
enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion. i
approached this tremendous being; i dared not again raise my eyes to his
face, there was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. i
attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. the monster
continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. at length i
gathered resolution to address him in a pause of the tempest of his passion.

“your repentance,” i said, “is now superfluous. if you
had listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse
before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity,
frankenstein would yet have lived.”

“and do you dream?” said the dæmon. “do you think that i was then
dead to agony and remorse? he,” he continued, pointing to the corpse,
“he suffered not in the consummation of the deed. oh! not the
ten-thousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the
lingering detail of its execution. a frightful selfishness hurried me
on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse. think you that the
groans of clerval were music to my ears? my heart was fashioned to be
susceptible of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice
and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without
torture such as you cannot even imagine.

“after the murder of clerval i returned to switzerland, heart-broken
and overcome. i pitied frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror; i
abhorred myself. but when i discovered that he, the author at once of
my existence and of its unspeakable torments, dared to hope for
happiness, that while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me
he sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from the
indulgence of which i was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter
indignation filled me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance. i
recollected my threat and resolved that it should be accomplished. i
knew that i was preparing for myself a deadly torture, but i was the
slave, not the master, of an impulse which i detested yet could not
disobey. yet when she died! nay, then i was not miserable. i had
cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my
despair. evil thenceforth became my good. urged thus far, i had no
choice but to adapt my nature to an element which i had willingly
chosen. the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable
passion. and now it is ended; there is my last victim!”

i was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when i called
to mind what frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and
persuasion, and when i again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my
friend, indignation was rekindled within me. “wretch!” i said.
“it is well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you
have made. you throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are
consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. hypocritical fiend!
if he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would
he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. it is not pity that you
feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn
from your power.”

“oh, it is not thus—not thus,” interrupted the being.
“yet such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to
be the purport of my actions. yet i seek not a fellow feeling in my misery.
no sympathy may i ever find. when i first sought it, it was the love of
virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being
overflowed, that i wished to be participated. but now that virtue has
become to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into
bitter and loathing despair, in what should i seek for sympathy? i am
content to suffer alone while my sufferings shall endure; when i die, i am
well satisfied that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory. once
my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment. once
i falsely hoped to meet with beings who, pardoning my outward form, would
love me for the excellent qualities which i was capable of unfolding. i was
nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion. but now crime has
degraded me beneath the meanest animal. no guilt, no mischief, no
malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. when i run over the
frightful catalogue of my sins, i cannot believe that i am the same
creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent
visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. but it is even so; the
fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. yet even that enemy of god and man
had friends and associates in his desolation; i am alone.

“you, who call frankenstein your friend, seem to have a knowledge of my
crimes and his misfortunes. but in the detail which he gave you of them
he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which i endured
wasting in impotent passions. for while i destroyed his hopes, i did
not satisfy my own desires. they were for ever ardent and craving; still
i desired love and fellowship, and i was still spurned. was there no
injustice in this? am i to be thought the only criminal, when all
humankind sinned against me? why do you not hate felix, who drove his
friend from his door with contumely? why do you not execrate the rustic
who sought to destroy the saviour of his child? nay, these are virtuous
and immaculate beings! i, the miserable and the abandoned, am an
abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on. even now my
blood boils at the recollection of this injustice.

“but it is true that i am a wretch. i have murdered the lovely and
the helpless; i have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to
death his throat who never injured me or any other living thing. i have
devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and
admiration among men, to misery; i have pursued him even to that
irremediable ruin. there he lies, white and cold in death. you hate me, but
your abhorrence cannot equal that with which i regard myself. i look on the
hands which executed the deed; i think on the heart in which the
imagination of it was conceived and long for the moment when these hands
will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more.

“fear not that i shall be the instrument of future mischief. my work
is nearly complete. neither yours nor any man’s death is needed to
consummate the series of my being and accomplish that which must be done,
but it requires my own. do not think that i shall be slow to perform this
sacrifice. i shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me
thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; i shall
collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its
remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would
create such another as i have been. i shall die. i shall no longer feel the
agonies which now consume me or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet
unquenched. he is dead who called me into being; and when i shall be no
more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. i shall no
longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. light,
feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must i find my
happiness. some years ago, when the images which this world affords first
opened upon me, when i felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the
rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds, and these were all to
me, i should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. polluted by
crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can i find rest but in
death?

“farewell! i leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these
eyes will ever behold. farewell, frankenstein! if thou wert yet alive
and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be better
satiated in my life than in my destruction. but it was not so; thou
didst seek my extinction, that i might not cause greater wretchedness;
and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceased to think
and feel, thou wouldst not desire against me a vengeance greater than
that which i feel. blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to
thine, for the bitter sting of remorse will not cease to rankle in my
wounds until death shall close them for ever.

“but soon,” he cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm, “i
shall die, and what i now feel be no longer felt. soon these burning
miseries will be extinct. i shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and
exult in the agony of the torturing flames. the light of that conflagration
will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds. my spirit
will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus.
farewell.”

he sprang from the cabin-window as he said this, upon the ice raft
which lay close to the vessel. he was soon borne away by the waves and
lost in darkness and distance.




*** end of the project gutenberg ebook frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus ***


    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

creating the works from print editions not protected by u.s. copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works,
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark. project gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark. if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u.s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


start: full license

the full project gutenberg license

please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™
electronic works

1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b. “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark. it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. see
paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works. see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works. nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states. if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed. of course, we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work. you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others.

1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. if you are outside the united states,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work. the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states.

1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. if you
    are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook.
  
1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u.s. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges. if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™.

1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license.

1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. however, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form. any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation. royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4, “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation.”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license. you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works.
    

1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark. contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u.s. copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. if you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. if
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you ‘as-is’, with no
other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
defect you cause.

section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg™

project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations. to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service. the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u.s. federal laws and your state’s laws.

the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west,
salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887. email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states. compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states. u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

section 5. general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. for forty years, he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u.s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

this website includes information about project gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.

